<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/index.css" />
      <title>Discourse on Immigration in 2016 Presidential Debates</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <div class="margin">
         <h1>Immigration Station</h1>
         <h2>A Critical discourse analysis of immigration in the 2016 Presidential Election</h2>
      </div>
      <div class="menu">
         <div class="dropdown">
            <a class="dropbtn" href="../../index.xhtml">Home</a>
         </div>
         <div class="dropdown">
            <a class="dropbtn" href="methodology.xhtml">Methodology</a>
         </div>

         <div class="dropdown">
            <button onclick="myFunction()" class="dropbtn">Candidates</button>
            <div id="candidates" class="dropdown-content">

               <a href="democrats.xhtml">Democrats</a>
               <a href="republicans.xhtml">Republicans</a>
            </div>
         </div>
         <div class="dropdown">
            <button onclick="myFunction()" class="dropbtn">Debates</button>
            <div id="debates" class="dropdown-content">

               <a href="demdebates.xhtml">Democratic Debates</a>
               <a href="repdebates.xhtml">Republican Debates</a>
               <a href="gendebates.xhtml">General Election Debates</a>
            </div>
         </div>

         <div class="dropdown">
            <a class="dropbtn" href="analysis.xhtml">Analysis</a>
         </div>
      </div>
      <div class="about">
         <p class="main">
            <strong>Introduction</strong>
            <br />Through this project, we examined immigration discourse as it related to the 2016 presidential debates. Our goal was to determine
            how candidates from both sides of the political spectrum coded their language when discussing concepts like immigration reform, amnesty, and
            legal repercussions. We did this by mining the corpus by using collocation and topic modeling tools to identify commonly used words or phrases,
            and then analyzed these results in terms of our larger data set. Our goal for this project was not to make judgements or draw explicit conclusions
            based on our results; rather, we sought to sort through and present clear data to be used in further research projects.
            <br />Within this discourse, we divided up types of immigration
            based on status, i.e. we specified "illegal" and "legal" immigration. We also associated utterances with certain attitudes, specifically refering
            to candidates' stances on immigration in pro, anti, and neutral terms. For longer excerpts, we analyzed tropes, identifiying if certain utterances
            referred to immigration in terms of "values", "security", or "economics". Within those tropes, we specified subtypes.
            <br />
         </p>
         <p class="main">
            <strong>Collocation</strong>
            <br /> Collocation text. <br />
         </p>
         <p class="main">
            <strong>MALLET</strong>
            <br />We began the topic modeling portion of this project by identifying forty topics
            with the text-mining tool MALLET. We only took sections marked "imm" into consideration,
            since these sections of the debates directly related to immigration; we did not consider
            sections marked "other". We settled on forty topics because we found that this number
            provided clear sub-topics within immigration that were relatively easy to identify. We
            made our own, non-computationally assisted judgements on the topics, so these informed
            judgement calls are imperfect. Some topics were difficult to decipher or irrelevant to
            our project, so we did not include them. These are the relevant sub-topics, divided into
            larger topics: <br />Policy: justice, issues, social welfare, laws <br />International:
            terrorism, militay, foreign policy, geopolitics <br />America First: idealism,
            middle-class, nationalism <br />Crime: drugs, gun control Economy: economic growth,
            working america, economy/taxes <br />Other topics included in the discourse related to
            references to specific candidates, references directly to the presidential race or the
            debate, and other unrelated topics including "corporations", "flint crisis", "police
            brutality", "obamacare", and "women's rights". MALLET was able to sort out these topics
            from the immigration discourse, but they do not seem directly relevant to this larger
            project. <br />Policy: this meta-topic deals with logistics relating to immigration, and
            the subsequent topics are self-explanatory. All laws relate to overarching immigration
            policies. <br />International: Topic six – terrorism – was simple to decipher. Words in
            this topic included "isis", "war", "radical", and so on. More crucial to our project,
            "refugees", a category of legal immigrant, also co-occurred with language relating to
            terrorism. (For the most part, our results found more immigration discourse related to
            people entering the United States from the southern border.) This shows that it was
            likely for candidates to discuss refugees and terrorism in the same breath.
            <br />America First: Other topics in the analysis related directly to praising the
            United States, its people, and its values. "Idealism" included words like "greatest",
            "history", and "future", showing how candidates praised the nation’s accomplishments in
            a time-specific context. This topic also included “middle-class,” which consisted of
            words like “people,” "working", and "families", showing how candidates collocated these
            terms in the same instances. Similarly, "nationalism" collocated words like "americans",
            "values", and "dream". This data shows the positive, optimistic language candidates used
            to refer to the nation in which they were running for president. <br />Crime: The
            "drugs" topic did not specifically contain words that would normally be associated with
            immigration. However, it did include words like "brought", referencing cases in which
            candidates referred to drugs that had been brought across the border, indirectly
            referencing immigration. The topic "gun control" also seemed to not directly relate to
            immigration. However, this topic included words like "terrorists", "san", and
            "bernardino", relating to the 2015 San Bernardino attack, in which ISIS claimed
            responsibility for two shooters with Middle Eastern heritage. This relates back to the
            "terrorism" topic, which included the word "refugees". <br />Economy: This category also
            related to the "america first" notion of valuing nationalism and the work of
            middle-class Americans. "Economic growth" included "job" and "cutting", which may refer
            to jobs that have been filled by immigrants. Similarly, the "working America" included
            "support" and "americans", and the "economy/taxes" topic included "jobs", "minimum", and
            "wages", which may refer to immigrant jobs.<br />
         </p>
         <p class="main">
            <strong>Plots</strong>
            <br /> Plot things <br />
         </p>
         <p class="main">
            <strong>Conclusion</strong>
            <br />Based on our research, we were able to determine that generally, Republican candidates referred to immigration in the 2016 presidential
            debates more frequently than their Democratic counterparts. The most popular individual terms included: "illegal alien", "illegal", "illegal immigrant",
            "undocumented ____", "dreamer" "asylum-seeker", "refugee", "migrant", and "guestworker". However, within this discourse, Republican candidates varied
            their speech to refer to immigration in pro, anti, and neutral terms, referencing specific concepts as diverse as "amnesty" and the proverbial "wall".
            Some Republican discourse referred to immigrants as "the bad ones" as well as "the good ones", showing a disparity within the party.
            <br />
         </p>
      </div>
   </body>
</html>
