<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy=compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Candidates' utterances</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h2>CLINTON</h2>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech293">[source] </a>
            <span class="trope">Well, first of all, I want to make
                sure every child gets health care.</span>
            <span class="trope">That's why I helped to create the
                Children's Health Insurance Program, and I want to support states that are expanding
                health care and including <span class="immigrant">undocumented children</span> and others.</span> I want to open up the
            opportunity for <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> to
            be able to buy in to the exchanges under the Affordable Care Act. I think to go beyond
            that, as I understand what Governor O'Malley has recommended, so that they would get the
            same subsidies. I think that is — it raises so many issues. It would be very difficult
            to administer, it needs to be part of a comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, when we finally do get to it. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech307">[source] </a> Demonize hard-working <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> who have insulted them. You know, I came
            to Las Vegas in, I think, May. Early may. Met with a group of DREAMers, I wish everybody
            in America could meet with this young people, to hear their stories, to know their
            incredible talent, their determination, and that's why I would go further. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech63">[source] </a> I think that is the number one requirement. I also said that we
            should take increased numbers of <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. The administration originally said 10. I said
            we should go to 65, but only if we have as careful a screening and vetting process as we
            can imagine, whatever resources it takes because I do not want us to, in any way,
            inadvertently allow people who wish us harm to come into our country. But I want to say
            a quick word about what Senator Sanders and then Governor O'Malley said. We do have to
            take a hard look at the defense budget and we do have to figure out how we get ready to
            fight the adversaries of the future, not the past. But we have to also be very clear
            that we do have some continuing challenges. We've got challenges in the South China Sea
            because of what China is doing in building up these military installations. We have
            problems with Russia. Just the other day, Russia allowed a television camera to see the
            plans for a drone submarine that could carry a tactical nuclear weapon. So we've got to
            look at the full range and then come to some smart decisions about having more
            streamlined and focused approach. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech94">[source] </a> Well, first of all, I know that the President has appealed the
            decision to the Supreme Court. And my reading of the law and the Constitution convinces
            me that the President has the authority that he is attempting to exercise with respect
            to dreamers and their parents, because I think all of us on this stage agree that we
            need <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> with a path to citizenship. Border security has
            always been a part of that debate. And it is a fact that the <span class="immigration">net immigration</span> from Mexico
            and South has basically zeroed out. <span class="trope">So, what we want to do is to say, look, we have 11
            million people who have been here, many of them for decades. They have children who are
            doing so well, I've met and worked with dreamers. I think any parent would be so proud
            of them. So let's move toward what we should be doing as a nation and follow the values
            of our <span class="immigrant">immigration history</span> and begin to make it possible for them to come out of the
            shadows and to have a future that gives them a full <span class="keyword">chance of citizenship</span>.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech89">[source] </a> I don't think a halt is necessary. What we have to do is put all of
            our resources through the Department of Homeland Security, through the State Department,
            through our intelligence agencies, and we have to have an increased vetting and
            screening. Now, this takes, David, 18 months to 24 months, two years. So I know it's not
            going to happen overnight and everything that can be done should be done. But the
            process should move forward while we are also taking on ISIS, putting together the kind
            of strategy that I've advocated for, and making sure that the vetting and the screening
            is as tough as possible. <span class="trope">Because I do believe that
                we have a history and a tradition, that is part of our values system and we don't
                want to sacrifice our values. We don't want to make it seem as though we are turning
                into a nation of fear instead of a nation of resolve. So I want us to have a very
                tough screening process but I want that process to go forward.</span> And if at the
            end of 18 months, 24 months there are people who have been cleared, and I would
            prioritize widows, and orphans, and the elderly, people who may have relatives,
            families, or have nowhere else to go. I would prioritize them. And that would I think
            give the American public a bit more of a sense of security about who is being processed
            and who might end up coming as <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech118">[source] </a> Martha, that -- you know, one of the reasons why I have advocated for
            a no-fly zone is in order to create those safe refuges within Syria, to try to protect
            people on the ground both from Assad's forces, who are continuing to drop barrel bombs,
            and from ISIS. And of course, it has to be de-conflicted with the Russians, who are also
            flying in that space. I'm hoping that because of the very recent announcement of the
            agreement at the Security Council, which embodies actually an agreement that I
            negotiated back in Geneva in June of 2012, we're going to get a diplomatic effort in
            Syria to begin to try to make a transition. A no-fly zone would prevent the outflow of
                <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> and give us a chance
            to have some safe spaces. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-01-17.xhtml#speech9">[source] </a> I would work quickly to present to the Congress my plans for creating
            more good jobs in manufacturing, infrastructure, clean and renewable energy, raising the
            minimum wage, and guaranteeing, finally, equal pay for women's work. I would
            also...[applause]...I would also be presenting my plans to build on the Affordable Care
            Act and to improve it by decreasing the out-of-pocket costs by putting a cap on
            prescription drug costs; by looking for ways that we can put the prescription drug
            business and the health insurance company business on a more stable platform that
            doesn't take too much money out of the pockets of hard-working Americans. And third, I
            would be working, in every way that I knew, to bring our country together. We do have
            too much division, too much mean- spiritedness. There's a lot we have to do on
            <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, on voting rights, on campaign finance reform, but we need to do it
            together. That's how we'll have the kind of country for the 21st century that we know
            will guarantee our children and grandchildren the kind of future they deserve.
            [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech202">[source] </a> Well, I—I don't accept that premise, Chuck. I think that we've got so much business we have to do. We've talked a lot tonight about what we're against—we're against income inequality. We're against the abuses of powerful interests. We're against a lot of things.

I'm for a lot of things. I don't want to just stop bad things from happening, I want to start good things from happening. And I believe, if I'm so fortunate to get the nomination, I will begin to work immediately on putting together an agenda, beginning to talk with members of Congress and others about how we can push forward.

I want to have half a billion more solar panels deployed, the first four years. [applause]

I want to have enough clean energy to power every home the next four years. I want us to keep working on the Affordable Care Act, to get not only to 100 percent coverage, but bring down the costs of prescription drugs and out-of-pocket costs.

I want to move forward on paid family leave, on early childhood education, I want us to do more for small businesses. [applause]

Small businesses have to create most of the jobs, and we're not creating and growing small businesses. I think, if you have a smart agenda, you pick the committees that you know have to begin to work on these various pieces—because that's the way Congress is set up. You go through different committees, and you really make a big push in the beginning.

<span class="keyword">Immigration reform</span>, economic revitalization with manufacturing, with infrastructure—we put it out there, and we begin to work on an ambitious, big, bold agenda that will actually produce the results that I want to see for our country.

</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech209">[source] </a> The answer to both of those is no. I'm interested in making what we have work better. I want to streamline programs that are duplicative and redundant. I want to have a top-to-bottom review about what works and what doesn't work, and be absolutely clear we're getting rid of what doesn't work.

I have had the opportunity to run a big agency. I was very flattered when Henry Kissinger said I ran the State Department better—better than anybody had run it in a long time. So I have an idea of what it's going to take to make our government work more efficiently.

And when you put together a budget, you have to make a lot of hard decisions, but I think it's not appropriate to say "I'm going to get rid of this, get rid of that" until you have a very good process that gives you the information about what to do.

But I want to add something else, you know, because look, we have so much work to do in our country, and I think it's the greatest work that Americans will be called to do. And of course, we have to have people in every community involved in it. We have to have the political voice, the political grassroots speaking up and speaking out about what we have to try to accomplish in Washington.

But we also need to have a very clear set of goals that we are going to achieve, and we need to level with the American people about what they are, what they will cost, what will be expected of our citizenry. So I see as president having a constant dialogue with Americans here's what we're trying to get done, here's why I need your help, here's why you may think comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> with a path to citizenship isn't something you care about, but I'm telling you it will help fix the labor market, it will bring people out of the shadows—

</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech9">[source] </a> Thank you very much. I've been looking forward to this
                debate, and I want to thank Univision, the Washington Post, Facebook and Miami-Dade
                College, the largest college in North America for hosting us here this evening.
                [applause] And tonight I am looking forward to the opportunity to discuss how we
                knock down the barriers that stand in the way of people getting ahead and staying
                ahead, starting with the economic ones. My focus is on more good paying jobs with
                rising incomes for families and how we prevent corporations from taking jobs out of
                our country by imposing an exit tax, making them pay back any tax breaks they've
                gotten. But we also need to be having a positive agenda for manufacturing. for small
                businesses and entrepreneurs, for more clean energy jobs. And I also look forward to
                discussing comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration
                    reform</span> with a <span class="keyword">path to
                    citizenship</span> that will be one of my priorities in my first 100 days as
                president. And I will also be talking about education, every child deserves a good
                teacher and a good school. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech40">[source] </a> In 2003, I sponsored the DREAMER Act. I sponsored I think in
                every Congress after that. I have been consistent and committed to <span class="trope">
            <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> with a
                        <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>.</span> I
                think our best chance was in 2007, when Ted Kennedy led the charge on <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>. We have
                Republican support. We had a president willing to sign it. I voted for that bill.
                Senator Sanders voted against it. Just think, imagine where we would be today is we
                had achieved <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                    reform</span> nine years ago. Imagine how much more secure families would be
                in our country, no longer fearing the deportation of a loved one; no longer fearing
                that they would be found out. So I am staunchly in favor of <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> and have
                been so over the course of my public career. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech47">[source] </a> If I could...[applause] You know, I think it's very hard to
                make the case that Ted Kennedy, Barack Obama, me, La Raza, United Farmworkers,
                Dolores Huerta, leaders of the Latino community, would have supported a bill that
                actually promoted modern slavery. That was one of the many excuses used not to vote
                for the 2007 bill. And I will go back to what I said. If we had been able to get
                that passed, we would be so much further along now. I'm committed to defending DAPA
                and DACA. I'm committed to going even further to get more people deferred action, to
                go as far as I can under the law. And I am committed to introducing <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> with a
                    <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span> in the first
                100 days of my presidency. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech50">[source] </a> Let me — let me respond again because the misrepresentation
                can't go unanswered here. First of all, that is something that is not fair about
                what I said. I did say we needed to be very concerned about little children coming
                to this country — on their own, very often — many of them not making it. And when
                they got here, they needed, as I have argued for, legal counsel, due process, to
                make a decision. We need to end private detention, we need to end family detention.
                And in 2006, when Senator Sanders was running for the Senate from Vermont, he voted
                in the House with hard-line Republicans for indefinite detention for <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                    immigrants</span>, and then he sided with those Republicans to stand with
                vigilantes known as Minute Men who were taking up outposts along the border to hunt
                down <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. So I think
                when you were running for the Senate, you made it clear by your vote, Senator, that
                you were going to stand with the Republicans. When you got to the Senate in 2007,
                one of the first things you did was vote against Ted Kennedy's <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> which he'd been working
                on for years before you ever arrived. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech65">[source] </a> Yes, you can because the question you were asking me were
                about children seeking asylum. And we have laws. That was the most critical thing I
                said. Under our laws. I would like to see those laws changed. I would like see added
                to them, a guaranteed counsel and other support for <span class="immigrant">children</span>. But if you are asking about everyone who
                is already here, <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span>, the 11-12 million who are living here, my
                priorities are to deport violent criminals, terrorists, and anyone who threatens our
                safety. So I do not have the same policy as the current administration does. I think
                it's important that we move to our <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span>, but at the same time, stop the raids, stop the
                round-ups, stop the deporting of people who are living here doing their lives, doing
                their jobs, and that's my priority. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech67">[source] </a> I will not deport <span class="immigrant">children</span>. I would not deport <span class="immigrant">children</span>. I do not want to deport <span class="immigrant">family members</span> either, Jorge. I
                want to, as I said, prioritize who would be deported: violent criminals, people
                planning terrorist attacks, anybody who threatens us. That's a relatively small
                universe. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech71">[source] </a> That's what I'm telling you. Now I don't want — because I'm
                not contradicting what I told you in the interview. <span class="keyword">Asylum</span> is a particular legal process. I'd like to see it changed. I'd
                like to see us give more support to people who come fleeing the terrible violence
                that they do. But under our law, we have a process we have to go [through which is
                different. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech77">[source] </a> Of the people, the <span class="immigrant">undocumented people</span> living in our
                country, I do not want to see them deported. I want to see them on a <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>. That is exactly what I
                will do. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech82">[source] </a> This is why I go back to that 2007 vote because if we had
                been successful then, a lot of the issues we are still discussing today would be in
                the rear-view mirror. I want us to be able to achieve <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> if I'm so
                fortunate enough to be president. And we do have to take a look at asylum laws. When
                I was secretary of state, I worked to try to support many different approaches to
                ending the violence in Central America. I was there meeting with leaders, security
                leaders, and others. And I think the Congress should support the president's request
                to fund programs that would protect people and change the culture of criminality and
                violence in Central America, helping people be able to stay safely in their homes
                and countries. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech84">[source] </a> Let me just conclude by saying that United Farm Workers
                considered that bill in their words the last best hope for farm workers and
                    <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. They have
                proven to be right in the succeeding years. I only hope that we can put together a
                coalition to pass <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                    reform</span> in the next Congress. And as I said earlier, in 2006, Senator
                Sanders supported indefinite detention for people facing deportation... </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech86">[source] </a> ...and stood with the Minutemen vigilantes in their
                ridiculous, absurd efforts to, quote, "hunt down <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. So look, I think the goal here is to
                elect a Democratic Senate, elect a Democratic president and get to work immediately
                to get <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                reform</span>. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech107">[source] </a> Well, I think both of us, both Senator Sanders and I, voted
                numerous times to enhance <span class="keyword">border security</span> along our
                    <span class="keyword">border</span>. We increased the number of <span class="keyword"> border security agents</span>. We did vote for money to build
                a <span class="keyword">fence</span>, a <span class="keyword">pedestrian
                    fence</span> in some place, a <span class="keyword">vehicle fence</span> in
                other places. And the result is that we have the most secure border we've ever had.
                Apprehensions coming across <span class="keyword">the border</span> are the
                lowest they've been in 40 years, which just strengthens my argument that now it's
                time to do <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                    reform</span>. The Republicans, the opponents no longer have an argument. And
                certainly, we hear a lot coming from the Republican side that is absolutely out of
                touch with reality. We raised money [through the congressional appropriations
                process. We enhanced the <span class="keyword">border security</span>. That part
                of the work is done. Everybody that I know has looked at it said, okay, we have a
                secure <span class="keyword">border</span>. There's no need for this rhetoric
                and demagoguery that's still —is carried out on the Republican side. You've run out
                of excuses. Let's move to <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span> with a <span class="keyword">path to
                    citizenship</span>. And I think that makes a very strong argument in favor of
                doing it. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech109">[source] </a> It's a big difference. First of all, as I understand him,
                he's talking about <span class="keyword">a very tall wall</span>. [laughter]
                Right? <span class="keyword">A beautiful tall wall</span>. <span class="keyword">The most beautiful tall wall</span>, better than the Great Wall of China,
                that would run the entire border. That he would somehow magically get the Mexican
                government to pay for. And, you know, it's just fantasy. And in fact, if he cared to
                know anything about what members of Congress, like the senator and I have done,
                where it was necessary, we did support <span class="keyword">some fencing</span>.
                Where it was necessary, we did add border patrol agents. We have done what by any
                fair estimate would have to conclude is a good job, quote, "securing the border". So
                let's get about the business of <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span>. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech181">[source] </a> Everything I just said will improve the living conditions,
                and I've spent a lot of time and effort talking to and mostly listening to Latinos.
                Jobs are the number one issue, with rising incomes. Close behind is education. Every
                child deserves a good teacher in a good school, regardless of the zip code that they
                live in. Following behind that is health care and how important it is to continue to
                build on the Affordable Care Act and provide access to health care. And then there
                are a number of other issues — <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span> certainly at the top. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-09.xhtml#speech21">[source] </a> Well, like everyone else, I've spent a lot of time thinking over the last 48 hours about what we heard and saw. You know, with prior Republican nominees for president, I disagreed with them on politics, policies, principles, but I never questioned their fitness to serve.

Donald Trump is different. I said starting back in June that he was not fit to be president and commander-in-chief. And many Republicans and independents have said the same thing. What we all saw and heard on Friday was Donald talking about women, what he thinks about women, what he does to women. And he has said that the video doesn't represent who he is.

But I think it's clear to anyone who heard it that it represents exactly who he is. Because we've seen this throughout the campaign. We have seen him insult women. We've seen him rate women on their appearance, ranking them from one to ten. We've seen him embarrass women on TV and on Twitter. We saw him after the first debate spend nearly a week denigrating a former Miss Universe in the harshest, most personal terms.

So, yes, this is who Donald Trump is. But it's not only women, and it's not only this video that raises questions about his fitness to be our president, because he has also targeted <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, African- Americans, Latinos, people with disabilities, POWs, Muslims, and so many others.

So this is who Donald Trump is. And the question for us, the question our country must answer is that this is not who we are. That's why—to go back to your question—I want to send a message—we all should—to every boy and girl and, indeed, to the entire world that America already is great, but we are great because we are good, and we will respect one another, and we will work with one another, and we will celebrate our diversity.

These are very important values to me, because this is the America that I know and love. And I can pledge to you tonight that this is the America that I will serve if I'm so fortunate enough to become your president.</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-09.xhtml#speech123">[source] </a> Well, first of all, I will not let anyone into our country that I think poses a risk to us. <span class="anecdote">But there are a lot of <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>, women and children—think of that picture we all saw of that 4-year-old boy with the blood on his forehead because he'd been bombed by the Russian and Syrian air forces.

There are children suffering in this catastrophic war, largely, I believe, because of Russian aggression. And we need to do our part.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-09.xhtml#speech227">[source] </a> Well, within hours I said that I was sorry about the way I talked about that, because my argument is not with his supporters. It's with him and with the hateful and divisive campaign that he has run, and the inciting of violence at his rallies, and the very brutal kinds of comments about not just women, but all Americans, all kinds of Americans.

And what he has said about African-Americans and Latinos, about Muslims, about POWs, about <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, about people with disabilities, he's never apologized for. And so I do think that a lot of the tone and tenor that he has said—I'm proud of the campaign that Bernie Sanders and I ran. We ran a campaign based on issues, not insults. And he is supporting me 100 percent.</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-19.xhtml#speech34">[source] </a>
         <span class="anecdote"> Well, as he was talking, I was thinking about a young girl I met
            here in Las Vegas, Carla, who is very worried that her parents might be deported,
            because she was born in this country but they were not.    They work hard, they do
            everything they can to give her a good life. </span>   And you're right.    I don't want to rip
            families apart.    I don't want to be sending parents away from children.    I don't want to
            see the deportation force that Donald has talked about in action in our country.    We have
            11 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented people.</span>   They have 4 million American citizen children, 15
            million people.    He said as recently as a few weeks ago in Phoenix that every
            <span class="immigrant">undocumented person</span> would be subject to deportation.  <span class="trope">  Now, here's what that means.    It
            means you would have to have a massive law enforcement presence, where law enforcement
            officers would be going school to school, home to home, business to business, rounding
            up <span class="immigrant">people who are undocumented</span>.    And we would then have to put them on trains, on buses
            to get them out of our country. </span>   
         <span class="trope">I think that is an idea that is not in keeping with who
    we are as a nation</span>.    I think it's an idea that would rip our country apart.    I have been
            for border security for years.    I voted for border security in the United States Senate. 
            <span class="platform">  And my <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> plan of course includes border security.    But I
            want to put our resources where I think they're most needed: Getting rid of any violent
            person. </span>   Anybody who should be deported, we should deport them.    When it comes to the <span class="keyword">wall</span>
            that Donald talks about building, he went to Mexico, he had a meeting with the Mexican
            president.    Didn't even raise it.    He choked and then got into a Twitter war because the
            Mexican president said we're not paying for that wall.  <span class="platform">  So I think we are both a nation
            of <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> and we are a nation of laws and that we can act accordingly. And that's
            why I'm introducing <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> within the first 100 days with the
            <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>. </span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-19.xhtml#speech46">[source] </a>  There are some limited places where that was appropriate.    There
            also is necessarily going to be new technology and how best to deploy that.    But it is
            clear, when you look at what Donald has been proposing, he started his campaign bashing
            <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, calling <span class="immigrant">Mexican immigrants</span> rapists and criminals and drug dealers, that he
            has a very different view about what we should do to deal with <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>.  <span class="trope">  Now, what I
            am also arguing is that bringing <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> out from the shadows, putting
            them into the formal economy will be good, because then employers can't exploit them and
            undercut Americans' wages. </span>   And Donald knows a lot about this.    He used undocumented labor
            to build the Trump Tower.    He underpaid undocumented workers, and when they complained,
            he basically said what a lot of employers do: "You complain, I'll get you deported. " <span class="platform">I
            want to get everybody out of the shadows, get the economy working, and not let employers
            like   Donald exploit <span class="immigrant">undocumented workers</span>, which hurts them, but also hurts American
            workers. </span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-19.xhtml#speech53">[source] </a>  We will not have <span class="keyword">open
            borders</span>.    That is. ..</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-19.xhtml#speech57">[source] </a>   We will have <span class="keyword">secure
            borders</span>, but we'll also have reform.    And this
            used to be a bipartisan issue.    Ronald Reagan was the last president. ..</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-19.xhtml#speech59">[source] </a>... to sign <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, and   George W.    Bush supported it,
            as well. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_gen_2016-10-19.xhtml#speech216">[source] </a>  But, of course, there's no way we can know whether any of that is true, because he
        hasn't released his tax returns.    He is the first candidate ever to run for president in the
        last 40-plus years who has not released his tax returns, so everything he says about charity
        or anything else, we can't prove it.    You can look at our tax returns.    We've got them all out
        there.    But what is really troubling is that we learned in the last debate he has not paid a
        penny in federal income tax.    And we were talking about <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> a few minutes ago, Chris. 
          You know, half of all <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>—<span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> in our country—actually pay federal
        income tax.    So we have <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> in America who are paying more federal income
        tax than a billionaire.    I find that just astonishing. </p>
      <h2>KAINE</h2>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_vp_2016-10-04.xhtml#speech191">[source] </a> Did Donald Trump apologize for taking after somebody in a
                Twitter war and making fun of her weight? Did he apologize for saying
                African-Americans are living in Hell? Did he apologize for saying President Obama
                was not even a citizen of the United States? You will look in vain to see Donald
                Trump ever taking responsibility for anybody and apologizing. <span class="immigration">Immigration</span>. There's
                two plans on the table. Hillary and I believe in <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>.
                Donald Trump believes in <span class="keyword">deportation nation</span>. You've got to pick your choice. Hillary
                and I want a bipartisan reform that will put keeping families together as the top
                goal, second, that will help focus enforcement efforts on those who are violent,
                third, that will do more border control, and, fourth, that will provide a <span class="keyword">path to
                citizenship</span> for those who work hard, pay taxes, play by the rules, and take criminal
                background record checks. That's our proposal. Donald Trump proposes to deport 16
                million people, 11 million who are here without documents. And both Donald Trump and
                Mike Pence want to get rid of birthright citizenship. So if you're born here, but
                your parents don't have documents, they want to eliminate that. That's another 4.5
                million people. These guys — and Donald Trump have said it — deportation force. They
                want to go house to house, school to school, business to business, and kick out 16
                million people. And I cannot believe... </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_vp_2016-10-04.xhtml#speech210">[source] </a> I look forward to working together in whatever capacities we
                serve in. But I just want to make it very, very clear that he's trying to fuzz up
                what Donald Trump has said. When Donald Trump spoke in Phoenix, he looked the
                audience in the eye and he said, no, we're building a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, and we're deporting
                everybody. He said, quote, "They will all be gone." "They will all be gone." And
                this is one of these ones where you can just go to the tape on it and see what
                Donald Trump has said. And to add... </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_vp_2016-10-04.xhtml#speech212">[source] </a> 
         <span class="trope">And to add to it, and to add to it, and to add to it, we are a
                nation of <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. Mike Pence and I both are descended from <span class="immigrant">immigrant families</span>.
                Some things, you know, maybe weren't said so great about the Irish when they came,
                but we've done well by absorbing <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, and it's made our nation stronger.</span> When
                Donald Trump says Mexicans are rapists and criminals, <span class="immigrant">Mexican immigrants</span>, when
                Donald Trump says about your judge, a Hoosier judge, he said that Judge Curiel was
                unqualified to hear a case because his parents were Mexican, I can't imagine how you
                could defend that. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_vp_2016-10-04.xhtml#speech238">[source] </a> We have different views on — on <span class="immigrant">refugee</span> issues and on
                <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. Hillary and I want to do enforcement based on, are people dangerous?
                These guys say all Mexicans are bad. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_vp_2016-10-04.xhtml#speech240">[source] </a> And with respect to <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>, we want to keep people out if
                they're dangerous. Donald Trump said keep them out if they're Muslim. Mike Pence... </p>
      <h2>SANDERS</h2>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech288">[source] </a> I didn't leave anybody at the altar. I voted against that piece
            of legislation because it had guest-worker provisions in it which the Southern Poverty
            Law Center talked about being semi-slavery. <span class="trope">
            <span class="immigrant">Guest
                    workers</span> are coming in, they're working under terrible conditions,
                but if they stand up for their rights, they're thrown out of the country.</span> I
            was not the only progressive to vote against that legislation for that reason. Tom
            Harkin, a very good friend of Hillary Clinton's and mine, one of the leading labor
            advocates, also voted against that. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech290">[source] </a> I know that. But point being is that progressives did vote
            against that for that reason. My view right now — and always has been — is that when you
            have 11 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                people</span> in this country, <span class="trope">we need comprehensive immigration reform, we need a path toward
                citizenship, we need to take people out of the shadows.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech55">[source] </a> Let me do that but let me pick up on an issue, a very important issue
            that we have not yet discussed. This nation is the most powerful military in the world.
            We're spending over $600 billion a year on the military and yet, significantly less than
            10 percent of that money is used to be fighting international terrorism. We are spending
            hundreds of billions of dollars maintaining 5,000 nuclear weapons. I think we need major
            reform in the military, making it more cost effective, but also focusing on the real
            crisis that faces us. The Cold War is over. And our focus has got to be on intelligence,
            increased manpower, fighting internationally targets. <span class="trope">So, in terms of <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>, I
            believe that the United States has the moral responsibility with Europe, with Gulf
            countries like Saudi Arabia to make sure that when people leave countries like
            Afghanistan and Syria with nothing more than the clothing on their back that, of course,
            we reach out.</span> Now, what the magic number is, I don't know, because we don't know the
            extent of the problem. But I certainly think that the United States should take its full
            responsibility in helping those people. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech27">[source] </a> I'm one of the 77 percent. I think this is a very difficult issue.
            Let me agree with much of what the secretary and the governor have said. Let me tell you
            what I think we have got to do. I think it's a two-pronged issue. Number one, our goal
            is to crush and destroy ISIS. What is the best way to do it? Well, I think there are
            some differences of opinion here, perhaps between the secretary and myself. I voted
            against the war in Iraq because I thought unilateral military action would not produce
            the results that were necessary and would lead to the kind of unraveling and instability
            that we saw in the Middle East. I do not believe in unilateral American action. I
            believe in action in which we put together a strong coalition of forces, major powers
            and the Muslim nations. I think one of the heroes in a real quagmire out there, in a
            dangerous and difficult world; one of the heroes who we should recognize in the Middle
            East is King Abdullah II of Jordan. This small country has welcomed in many <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. And Abdullah said something
            recently, very important. He said, "Yes, international terrorism is by definition an
            international issue, but it is primarily an issue of the Muslim nations who are fighting
            for the soul of Islam. We the Muslims should lead the effort on the ground." And I
            believe he is absolutely right. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech310">[source] </a>
            <span class="anecdote">Well, thank you very much for hosting
                this debate, and let me applaud my colleagues up here. Because I think frankly,
                maybe I'm wrong, but on our worst day, I think we have a lot more to offer the
                American people than the right wing's extremists. [applause] My father came to this
                country from Poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket, which sparked
                my interest in the need for <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> because I know what it's like to be the
                    <span class="immigrant">son of an
                    immigrant</span>. We grew up in a three-and-a-half-room, rent controlled
                apartment in Brooklyn, New York. My mother's dream -- and she died very young, but
                my mother's dream for her whole life was to be able to get out of that
                rent-controlled apartment and own a home of her own. She never lived to see
                that.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech206">[source] </a> ... I am absolutely supportive of comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> and a <span class="trope">
            <span class="keyword">path towards citizenship</span> for 11 million people today who are living in the shadows</span>. All right? We got to do that. [applause]

But you miss—when you looked at the issues, you missed two of the most important. And that is you're not going to accomplish what has to be done for working families and the middle class unless there is campaign finance reform. [applause]

So long as big money interests control the United States Congress, it is gonna be very hard to do what has to be done for working families. So let me be very clear. No nominee of mine, if I'm elected president, to the United States Supreme Court will get that nomination unless he or she is loud and clear, and says they will vote to overturn Citizens United. [applause]

Second point—second point is that the only way we make change in terms of health care, in terms of dealing with a broken criminal justice system which, today, allows us to have more people in jail than any other country—largely African-American and Latino—the only way we create millions of jobs by rebuilding our infrastructure or have a tax system that says to the wealthy that they are going to pay their fair share, is when millions of people become involved in the political process.

No, you just can't negotiate with Mitch McConnell. Mitch is gonna have to look out the window and see a whole lot of people saying, "Mitch, stop representing the billionaire class. Start listening to working families."

And as president, that's what I will work hard on. [applause]

</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech13">[source] </a> Thank you — thank you all very much. I'm running for
                president of the United States because given the crises facing our country, it is
                just too late for establishment politics and establishment economics. Together we're
                going to have to overturn this disastrous Citizens United Supreme Court decision.
                [applause] Billionaires and Wall Street should not be buying elections. We've got to
                end this rigged economy where people are working longer hours for low wages, almost
                all new income and wealth going to the top 1 percent, and of course, <span class="platform">we need comprehensive
                        <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> and a
                        <span class="keyword">path toward
                    citizenship</span>.</span> And here in Miami...[applause]...here in Miami
                as much as any city in America, we know that we have got to combat climate change,
                transform our energy system, and leave this planet in a way that is healthy and
                habitable for our kids and our grandchildren. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech35">[source] </a> This is what I think. I think that the American people are
                never going to elect a president who insults Mexicans, who insults Muslims, who
                insults women, who insults African-Americans. And let us not forget that several
                years ago, Trump was in the middle of the so- called birther movement, trying to
                delegitimize the president of the United States of America. [applause] You know, I
                find it very interesting, Karen, my dad was born in Poland. I know a little bit
                about the <span class="immigrant">immigrant
                    experience</span>. Nobody has ever asked me for my birth certificate. Maybe
                it has something to do with the color of my skin. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech44">[source] </a> Well, you have guestworker programs that have been described
                by the Southern Poverty Law Center, one of the important institutions in this
                country who studies these issues, as guestworkers programs akin to slavery, where
                people came in. They were cheated. They were abused. They were humiliated. And if
                they stood up for their rights, they would be thrown out of the country. Of course,
                that type of [inaudible] leads to a race to the bottom for all of our people. And I
                worked very hard on that issue. And of course, I supported the 2013 <span class="keyword">immigration reform bill</span>. And what I believe
                right now is not only that we need <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span>, if the Congress does not do its job, as president
                of the United States I will use the executive powers of that office to do what has
                to be done, to do what President Obama did, and expand on that. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech49">[source] </a> Well, when we talk about efforts to assist <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, Secretary Clinton
                prevailed upon the governor of New York, Elliot Spitzer, who wanted to do the right
                thing and provide driver's license to <span class="immigrant">these who were undocumented</span>, she
                said don't do it, and New York State still does not do it. In Vermont, by the way, I
                worked with officials and <span class="immigrant">undocumented people</span> in Vermont do have the ability to get driver's
                license. [applause] When we talk about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, the secretary will remember that
                one of the great tragedies, human tragedies of recent years is children came from
                Honduras where there's probably more violence than almost any place in this country,
                and they came into this country. And I said welcome those children into this
                country, Secretary Clinton said send them back. That's a difference. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech54">[source] </a> You know, Ted Kennedy was a very close friend of mine, and I
                served on the committee he chaired, the Health, Education, Labor Committee. And Ted
                Kennedy was kind enough to allow me to hold a hearing in 2008, I believe, in
                Congress, dealing with the plight of <span class="immigrant">undocumented tomato pickers</span> in
                Immokalee, Florida. [applause] And I went there on my own. Wasn't an issue really
                for the state of Vermont to expose the horrendous working conditions and the semi
                slavery, if you like, that <span class="immigrant">those
                    workers</span> lived under. And the result of that hearing and the work
                that many, many people did was to significantly improve the wages and working
                conditions of <span class="immigrant">those
                    workers</span>. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech79">[source] </a> Let me just say this. I don't think that the secretary fully
                answered your question, and I think the proof may be in the pudding. Honduras and
                that region of the world may be the most violent region in our hemisphere. Gang
                lords, vicious people torturing people, doing horrible things to families. Children
                fled that part of the world to try, try, try, try, maybe, to meet up with their
                family members in this country, taking a route that was horrific, trying to start a
                new life. Secretary Clinton did not support those children coming into this country.
                I did. Now I happen to agree with President Obama on many, many issues. I think he
                has done a great job as president of the United States. He is wrong on this issue of
                deportation. I disagree with him on that. [applause] So to answer your question, no,
                I will not deport <span class="immigrant">children</span>
                from the United States of America. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech83">[source] </a> Let me just answer, I want to get back to this 2007 <span class="keyword">immigration bill</span>. It's true, Ted Kennedy, a
                good friend of mine, and I think of the secretary's, did work very hard on that
                bill. But does anyone really believe that if that bill was all so good, as the
                secretary is touting, that LULAC and other major Latino organizations, the largest
                Latino organizations in this country said no to that bill. And I worked very hard in
                improving the guest worker provisions so that in 2013 a bill I strongly supported,
                people who were in the guest worker program in America would not be treated like
                slaves. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech112">[source] </a> I think the secretary and I mostly, I think, agree on this
                issue. Look, in this country, <span class="keyword">immigration
                    reform</span> is a very hot debate. It's divided the country. But I would
                hope very much, that as we have that debate, we do not, as Donald Trump and others
                have done, resort to racism and xenophobia and bigotry. [applause] This idea of
                suddenly, one day or maybe a night, rounding up 11 million <span class="immigrant">people</span> and taking them outside of
                this country is a vulgar, absurd idea that I would hope very few people in America
                support. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech118">[source] </a> Well, I absolutely support that. At the heart of my <span class="keyword">immigration policy</span> and I should say that the
                New York times editorial board called my <span class="keyword">immigration policy</span> the most progressive and the strongest of any
                candidate running. But to answer your question, the essence of what we are trying to
                do is to unite families, not to divide families. [applause] The idea that a mother
                is living here and her children are on the other side of the border is wrong and
                immoral. A number of months ago, I talked to a young man who was serving in the
                United States military and while he was serving in the military, his wife was
                deported. That is beyond comprehension and policies that should not be allowed to
                exist. So, ma'am, I will do everything that I can to unite your family. Your
                children deserve to be with their mother. [applause] </p>
      <h2>WEBB</h2>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech3">[source] </a> Thank you.

You know, people are disgusted with the way that money has corrupted our political process, intimidating incumbents and empowering Wall Street every day, the turnstile government that we see, and also the power of the financial sector in both parties.

They're looking for a leader who understands how the system works, who has not been coopted by it, and also has a proven record of accomplishing different things. I have a record of working across the political aisle. I've also spent more than half of my professional life away from politics in the independent world of being an author, a journalist, and a sole proprietor.

In government service, I've fought and bled for our country in Vietnam as a Marine. I spent years as Assistant Secretary of Defense, Secretary of the Navy — in the Reagan administration.

In the senate, I spoke about economic fairness and social justice from day one. I also wrote and passed the best piece of veterans education legislation in history, the Post 9/11 G.I. Bill. I brought criminal justice reform out of the political shadows and into the national discussion. I led what later became called the Strategic Pivot to Asia two years before President Obama was elected.

I know where my loyalties are.

My mother grew up in the poverty of east Arkansas chopping cotton, picking strawberries. Three of her seven siblings died in childhood. <span class="anecdote">My wife, Hong, came to this country as a <span class="immigrant">refugee</span> from war torn Vietnam — learned English, a language that was not spoken at home, and earned her way into Cornell Law School.</span> I have five daughters. Amy works with disabled veterans, Sarah is an emergency room nurse, Julia is a massage therapist, Emily and Georgia are still in school. My son Jim fought as an infantry Marine on the bloody streets of Ramadi.

You may be sure that in a Webb administration, the highest priority will be the working people who every day go out and make this country stronger at home, and who give us the right reputation and security overseas under a common sense foreign policy. [cheering and applause]

</p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech299">[source] </a> I wouldn't have a problem with that. <span class="anecdote"> Let me start by saying my wife is an <span class="immigrant">immigrant</span>. She was a <span class="immigrant">refugee</span>, her
                family escaped from Vietnam on a boat-- her entire extended family, after the
                communists took over, when hundreds of thousands of people were out there and
                thousands of them were dying. Went to two refugee camps, she never spoke English in
                her home, and she ended, as I said, graduating from Cornell Law School. That's not
                only American dream, that's a value that we have with a good <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> in place. </span> No
            country has — is a country without defining its borders. We need to resolve this issue.
            I actually introduced an amendment in the 2007 <span class="keyword">immigration bill</span>. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech301">[source] </a>  Giving a <span class="keyword">pathway to citizenship</span> to those
            people who had come here, and put down their roots, and met as a series of standards. .. </p>
      <p>
         <a class="text" href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech303">[source] </a> . .. lost (ph) — I introduced that in 2007 — We need a <span class="keyword">comprehensive
            reform</span>, and we need to be able to define our <span class="keyword">borders</span>. </p>
   </body>
</html>
