<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>

<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
    <head>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/methodology.css" />
        <title>Discourse on Immigration in 2016 Presidential Debates</title>
    </head>
    <body>
        <div class="margin">
            <h1>Immigration Station</h1>
            <h2>A Critical discourse analysis of immigration in the 2016 Presidential Election</h2>
        </div>
        <div class="menu">
            <div class="dropdown">
                <a class="dropbtn" href="../../index.xhtml">Home</a>
            </div>
            <div class="dropdown">
                <a class="dropbtn" href="methodology.xhtml">Methodology</a>
            </div>

            <div class="dropdown">
                <button onclick="myFunction()" class="dropbtn">Candidates</button>
                <div id="candidates" class="dropdown-content">

                    <a href="democrats.xhtml">Democrats</a>
                    <a href="republicans.xhtml">Republicans</a>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div class="dropdown">
                <button onclick="myFunction()" class="dropbtn">Debates</button>
                <div id="debates" class="dropdown-content">

                    <a href="demdebates.xhtml">Democratic Debates</a>
                    <a href="repdebates.xhtml">Republican Debates</a>
                    <a href="gendebates.xhtml">General Election Debates</a>
                </div>
            </div>

            <div class="dropdown">
                <a class="dropbtn" href="analysis.xhtml">Analysis</a>
            </div>
        </div>
        <div class="about">
            <div class="main">
                <strong>Critical Discourse Theory</strong>
                <br /> In contrast to more traditional lines of inquiry localized to the political
                sciences, this project employs critical discourse analysis methods in its analysis
                of speech acts concerning immigration during the 2016 presidential campaign season.
                Rather than analyze the potential implications of platforms proposed by presidential
                candidates, this projects concerns itself with the linguistic underpinnings that
                necessitate such platforms. We argue that vastly different immigration and
                immigration reform proposals put forth during the 2016 presidential election cycle
                were rooted in as much, if not more, a given candidate's immigration rhetoric as
                opossed to any so-called fact based reality. Rather, in keeping with the post-modern
                traditions of <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Foucault">Michael
                    Focault</a>, we aim to demonstrate that knowledge and reality are constructs of
                language, rather than objective truths . Thus, advocacy for building a wall along
                the United States' southern border can be a viable platform for constituencies that
                use the phrase "illegal immigrant"- just as amnesty and a pathway to citizenship can
                be fitting for those who use the terms "dreamer" and "undocumented." </div>

            <div class="main">
                <strong>Political Discourse and the 2016 Election Cycle</strong>
                <br /> Defining exactly what constitutes political discourse can prove to be its own
                endeavor. For simplicity's sake, we find van Djik's definition of political to be
                most poinent: "the easiest, and not altogether misguided, answer is that political
                discourse is identified by its actors or authors, viz., politicians." <a
                    href="http://discourses.org/OldArticles/What%20is%20Political%20Discourse%20Analysis.pdf"
                    >-Teun van Djik </a> Nevertheless, we feel it necessary to explicate further our
                decision to analyze immigration discourse from the 2016 presidential election cycle.
                Without a doubt, rhetoric from the 22 analyzed presidential candidates running for
                election constitutes political discourse. However, we will argue that the 2016
                presidential election campaign season marked a moment of inflated political
                participation- both in terms of candidates and constituents. On the campaign trail
                candidates engaged in a considerable number of discursive acts including speeches,
                rallys, town-halls, and debates. At the same time, a record number of recipients
                attended, listened, and viewed these speech acts. Thus, we contend that the
                heightened degree of political participation during the 2016 presdiential election
                cycle, on account of politicians and constitutents, marks an appropriate moment to
                analyze political discourse on immigration. <br />
            </div>
            <div class="main">
                <strong>Concerning Method</strong>
                <br /> In our XML markup phase we focused on two levels of rhetorical analysis. On
                one level, tagged individual words that were relevant to immigration rhetoric. Words
                describing immigrants, illegal/undocumented immigrants, or refugees recieved the tag
                "immigrant" with attribute values "status," denoting the subject's legal immigratory
                status and "term" denoting the actual term used by the candidate. Immigration
                related terms recieved identical treatment, however under the tag "immigration"
                instead. In addition we included "keyword" tags, which were used on individual words
                or phrases pertaining to immigration such as amnesty, border, wall, pathway to
                citizenship, or Dreamer. <br /> On the second linguistic level, we marked what we
                called "tropes." Trope tags, as inspired by the "frames of reference" described in
                Dr. Luke Peterson's <em>Israel Palestine in the Print Media</em>, were used to
                describe any speech utterances that disucssed immigration in terms of a specific
                ideological positions, or frames of reference. These ideological dispositions are
                often rooted in a candidate's definition of a given issue, and propogate an
                emotional rather than objective or fact based response. Thus, utterances such as
                "the fact is, since then, many killings, murders, crime, drugs pouring across the
                border, are money going out and the drugs coming in," employs a homeland security
                frane of reference. By this perspective illegal immigration should be viewed as a
                harbinger of crime, drugs, and death to innocent Americans. Other tropes employ
                economic and American value based statements in order to define immigration in a
                positive or negative light. In our markup, we tagged sentence similar to our example
                denoting the trope's "type" grouped as economic, national security, and American
                values. Then, when applicable these tropes were given a subtype to further specifiy
                an observed fram of reference. Thus, the latte example would be tagged with the
                "trope" element, "secure" type, and "crime drugs" subtype denoting a frame of
                reference that depicts immigrants as criminals and drug pushers. </div>

            <div class="main">
                <strong>Topic Modeling with MALLET</strong>
                <br />Along with our critical discourse analysis conducted through manual textual
                markup, a statistical textual collection and analysis tool called MALLET was
                implemented to identify "topics" in the presidential debates. These "topics" are
                generated entirely by the program, by feeding it the text of each debate, at which
                point the program identifies words that appear in close proximity repeated times
                throughout the discourse. Once the word clusters are captured by the program, it
                then assembles those word groups into lists which become respective "topics." It is
                worth mentioning that, while the topics created by the program can produce coherent
                textual themes that manual analysis could not produce, the program itself
                (obviously) has no idea what the words it selects actually mean. That is to say, the
                words themselves are nothing more than a string of letters to the computer, who
                assembles lists on that basis alone. The analysis of its topic collection and the
                significance of each of the topics in regard to our central research questions is
                where we, the researchers, re-entered the equation.</div>

            <div class="main">
                <strong>Collocation Analysis</strong>
                <br /> Similar to topic modeling, collocation analysis is another corpus-level
                textual analysis tool that identifies regularities in word usage in a body of texts.
                Unlike topic modeling, however, collocation analysis does not generate topics, but
                rather it simply collects the words that co-occur in greatest frequency in a
                selected body of text. In the context of our research, the collocation elicited
                terms that appeared in tandem in the immigration sections of the debates. </div>

            <div class="main">
                <strong>Sources</strong>
                <br /> A special thanks goes out to Gerhard Peters, John T. Wooley, and their
                American Presidency Project, whose debate transcripts we have borrowed for this
                project. We highly recommend users to take a look at their project. They can be
                found at <a href="http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu">http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu
                </a><br />
            </div>
        </div>
    </body>
</html>
