<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html
  SYSTEM "about:legacy=compat">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
   <head>
      <title>Stuff about immigration</title>
   </head>
   <body>
      <h2>BARTIROMO</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech125">[source] </a>We — we want to hear from all of you on this. According to Pew
            Research, the U.S. admits more than 100,000 <span class="immigrant">Muslim immigrants</span> every single year on a
            permanent lifetime basis. I want to ask the rest of you to comment on this. Do you agree
            that we should pause <span class="immigration">Muslim
                immigration</span> until we get a better handle on our homeland security
            situation, as Mr. Trump has said? Beginning with you, Governor Kasich.</p>
      <h2>BASH</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech268">[source] </a> Governor Bush, Mr. Trump has suggested that your views on
            <span class="immigration">immigration</span> are influenced by your Mexican born wife. He said that, quote, "If my wife
            were from Mexico, I think I would have a soft spot for people from Mexico." Did Mr.
            Trump go to far in invoking your wife? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1003">[source] </a> Governor Bush, Mr. Trump has suggested that your views on
                    <span class="immigration">immigration</span> are
                influenced by your Mexican born wife. He said that, quote, "If my wife were from
                Mexico, I think I would have a soft spot for people from Mexico." Did Mr. Trump go
                to far in invoking your wife? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech251">[source] </a> Thank you, Dr. Carson. We've been talking tonight about programs and
        policy proposals that you all have to keep Americans safe and it's a big discussion on the
        campaign trail. Also about <span class="keyword">border</span> security and <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. So let's talk about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>.
        Senator Rubio. You co-authored a bill with Democrats two years ago that allowed a <span class="keyword">path to
        citizenship</span> for <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span>. Do you still support that <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>,
        which means giving those <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> rights, like the right to vote?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech257">[source] </a> Thank you, senator. Senator Cruz. [applause] Senator Cruz, on the
        campaign trail, Senator Rubio has said that his <span class="immigration">immigration</span> plan is not that different from
        yours. Is that true?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech293">[source] </a> Listening to this, do you think this is the tone — this <span class="immigration">immigration</span>
        debate that republicans need to take to win back Hispanics into our party especially states
        like where we are in Nevada that has a pretty Hispanic community?</p>
      <h2>BLITZER</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech297">[source] </a> Senator Paul, you oppose letting in <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span> at this time into
        the United States. The U.S. has already accepted 2,000 <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span>, including 13 living
        here in Las Vegas right now. Would you send them back? What would you do with these
        people?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech301">[source] </a> Senator Paul, you didn't answer the question about the 2,000 <span class="immigrant">Syrian
        refugees</span> who are already here in the United States. Will you send them back or let them
        stay?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech305">[source] </a> Governor Christie, you say there should be a pause in allowing new
        <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> to come into the United States, including orphans under the age of five. What do
        you say to Carla?</p>
      <h2>BUSH</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech54">[source] </a>
            <span class="trope">I do. I believe that the great
                majority of people coming here illegally have no other option. They want to provide
                for their family.</span>
            <span class="platform">But we need to control our
                    <span class="keyword">border</span>. It's not ...it's our responsibility to
                pick and choose who comes in.</span> So I ...I've written a book about this and
            yet this week, I did come up with a comprehensive strategy that ...that really mirrored
            what we said in the book, which is that we need to deal with <span class="keyword">E-Verify</span>, we need to deal with people that come with a legal <span class="keyword">visa and overstay</span>. We need to be much more strategic
            on how we deal with <span class="keyword">border enforcement</span>, <span class="keyword">border security</span>. We need to eliminate the <span class="keyword">sanctuary cities</span> in this country. <span class="trope">It is ridiculous and
                tragic...[applause]...that people are dying because of the fact that ...that local
                governments are not following the federal law.</span>
                There's much to do. And I think rather than talking about this as a wedge issue, which Barack Obama has done now for
                six long years, <span class="trope">the next president ...and I hope to be that president ...will fix
                this once and for all so that we can turn this into a driver for high sustained
                economic growth.</span>
            <span class="platform">And there should be a
                path to <span class="keyword">earned legal status</span>...[timer sounds] ...for those that are here. Not
                ...<span class="keyword">not amnesty</span>, <span class="keyword">earned legal status</span>, which
                means you pay a fine and do many things over an extended period of time.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech188">[source] </a> We've done it 27 times since World War II. I think we need to lift our spirits and have high, lofty expectations for this great country of ours.

The new normal of two percent that the left is saying you can't do anything about is so dangerous for our country. There's 6 million people living in poverty today, more than when Barack Obama got elected. 6.5 million people are working part-time, most of whom want to work full-time. We've created rules and taxes on top of every aspiration of people, and the net result is we're not growing fast, income's not growing. A four percent growth strategy means you fix a convoluted tax code. You get in and you change every aspect of regulations that are job killers. You get rid of Obamacare and replace it with something that doesn't suppress wages and kill jobs. [applause]

You embrace the energy revolution in our country. This president and Hillary Clinton, who can't even say she's for the XL pipeline even after she's left? Give me a break. Of course we're for it. We should be for these things to create high sustained economic growth. And frankly, [timer sounds] fixing our <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> and turning it into an economic driver is part of this as well. We can do this. [applause]

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech309">[source] </a> Here's what I believe. I believe we're at the verge of the greatest
            time to be alive in this world. But Washington is holding us back. How we tax, how we
            regulate. We're not embracing the energy revolution in our midst, a broken <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> that has been politicized
            rather than turning it into an economic driver. We're not protecting and preserving our
            entitlement system or reforming for the next generation. All these things languish while
            we have politicians in Washington using these as wedge issues. Here's my commitment to
            you, because I did it as Florida. We can fix these things. We can grow economically and
            restore America's leadership in the world, so that everybody has a chance to rise up. I
            humbly ask for your vote, whenever you're gonna get to vote, whenever the primary is.
            Thank you all very much. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech281">[source] </a> So, here's the deal. <span class="anecdote">My wife is a Mexican-American. She's an American by choice. She loves
                this country as much as anybody in this room, and she wants a secure <span class="keyword">border</span>. But she wants to embrace the traditional
                American values that make us special and make us unique. We're at a crossroads right
                now. Are we going to take the Reagan approach, the hopeful optimistic approach, the
                approach that says that, you come to our country legally, you pursue your dreams
                with a vengeance, you create opportunities for all of us?</span> Or the Donald
            Trump approach? The approach that says that everything is bad, that everything is coming
            to an end. I... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech293">[source] </a> Look, first of all, I wrote a book about this, three — four years
            ago, now. And I laid out a comprehensive, conservative approach for <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>.
            And it does require securing the <span class="keyword">border</span>. No one
            disagrees with that. <span class="trope">But to build a
                    <span class="keyword">wall</span>, and to deport people — half a million a
                month — would cost hundreds of billions of dollars, Donald. Hundreds of billions of
                dollars. It would destroy community life, it would tear families apart. And it would
                send a signal to the rest of the world that the United States values that are so
                important for our long-term success no longer matter in this country.</span>
            [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech297">[source] </a> Well, I've been speaking English here tonight, and I'll keep
            speaking English. <span class="trope">But the simple fact is, if a high school kid asks me a question in
            Spanish, a school — by the way, a voucher program that was created under my watch, the
            largest voucher program in the country, where kids can go to a Christian school, and
            they ask me a question in Spanish, I'm going to show respect and answer that question in
            Spanish. Even though they do speak English, and even though they embrace American
            values.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1016">[source] </a> So, here's the deal. <span class="anecdote">My wife is a Mexican-American. She's an American by choice. She
                    loves this country as much as anybody in this room, and she wants a secure
                        <span class="keyword">border</span>. But she wants to embrace the
                    traditional American values that make us special and make us unique. We're at a
                    crossroads right now. Are we going to take the Reagan approach, the hopeful
                    optimistic approach, the approach that says that, you come to our country
                    legally, you pursue your dreams with a vengeance, you create opportunities for
                    all of us?</span> Or the Donald Trump approach? The approach that says that
                everything is bad, that everything is coming to an end. I... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1028">[source] </a> Look, first of all, I wrote a book about this, three — four
                years ago, now. And I laid out a comprehensive, conservative approach for
                immigration reform. And it does require securing the <span class="keyword">border</span>. No one disagrees with that. <span class="trope">But to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, and to deport people — half a million a month — would cost
                    hundreds of billions of dollars, Donald. Hundreds of billions of dollars. It
                    would destroy community life, it would tear families apart. And it would send a
                    signal to the rest of the world that the United States values that are so
                    important for our long-term success no longer matter in this country.</span>
                [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1032">[source] </a> Well, I've been speaking English here tonight, and I'll keep
                speaking English. <span class="trope">But the
                    simple fact is, if a high school kid asks me a question in Spanish, a school —
                    by the way, a voucher program that was created under my watch, the largest
                    voucher program in the country, where kids can go to a Christian school, and
                    they ask me a question in Spanish, I'm going to show respect and answer that
                    question in Spanish. Even though they do speak English, and even though they
                    embrace American values.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech294">[source] </a> No it isn't but it is an important subject to talk about for sure. And I
        think people have good ideas on this. Clearly, we need to secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>. <span class="trope">Coming here
        legally needs to be a lot easier than coming here illegally. If you don't have that, you
        don't have the rule of law.</span> 
         <span class="trope">We now have a national security consideration, public health
        issues, we have an epidemic of heroine overdoses in all places in this country because of
        the ease of bringing heroine in. We have to secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>.</span> It is a serious undertaking
        and yes, we do need more <span class="keyword">fencing</span> and we do need to use technology, and we do need more
        <span class="keyword">border control</span>. <span class="trope">And we need to have better cooperation by the way with local law
        enforcement. There are 800,000 cops on the beat, they ought to be trained to be the eyes and
        ears for law enforcement for the threat against terror as well as for <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. This is a
        serious challenge and if we can get it right, yes, we'll start winning votes again.</span> The real
        problem isn't anybody on this stage, the real problem is Barack Obama has had six years to
        advocate a position to fix this and he's done nothing. The congress has funded these
        programs of building more <span class="keyword">fencing</span> and doing all this and he hasn't done it. He wants to
        maintain it as a wedge issue and so does Hillary Clinton. Republicans need to fix it and
        when we do, we'll be better off.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech117">[source] </a>Donald, Donald — can I — I hope you reconsider this, because this
            policy is a policy that makes it impossible to build the coalition necessary to take out
            ISIS. The Kurds are our strongest allies. They're Muslim. You're not going to even allow
            them to come to our country? The other Arab countries have a role to play in this. We
            cannot be the world's policeman. We can't do this unilaterally. We have to do this in
            unison with the Arab world. And sending that signal makes it impossible for us to be
            serious about taking out ISIS and restoring democracy in Syria. [applause] So I hope
            you'll reconsider. I hope you'll reconsider. The better way of dealing with this — the
            better way of dealing with this is recognizing that there are people in, you know, the —
            Islamic terrorists inside, embedded in <span class="immigrant">refugee</span> populations. What we ought to do is tighten up our efforts to
            deal with the entry visa program so that a citizen from Europe, it's harder if they've
            been traveling to Syria or traveling to these other places where there is Islamic
            terrorism, make it harder — make the screening take place.<span class="trope"> We don't have to have <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> come to our country, but all Muslims,
                seriously? What kind of signal does that send to the rest of the world that the
                United States is a serious player in creating peace and security?</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech123">[source] </a>No, not at all, absolutely not. I can see why people are angry and
            scared, because this president has created a condition where our national security has
            weakened dramatically. I totally get that. But we're running for the presidency of the
            United States here. This isn't — this isn't, you know, a different kind of job. <span class="trope">You have to lead. You cannot make rash
                statements and expect the rest of the world to respond as though, well, it's just
                politics. Every time we send signals like this, we send a signal of weakness, not
                strength.</span> And so it was [inaudible] his statement, which is why I'm asking
            him to consider changing his views. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech161">[source] </a>Well, I'm kind of confused because he was the sponsor of the Gang of
            Eight bill that did require a bunch of thresholds but ultimately allowed for citizenship
            over an extended period of time. I mean, that's a fact. And he asked me to support that.
            And I — I supported him because I think people, when you're elected, you need to do
            things. And he led the charge to finally fix this <span class="immigration">immigration</span> problem that has existed
            now for, as Marco says, for 30 years. And then he cut and run because it wasn't popular
            amongst conservatives, I guess. Here's what I believe. And I wrote a book about this
            called Immigration Wars. You can get it at $2.99 on Amazon. It's not a bestseller. I can
            promise you. [laughter] There won't be any — you can get it. It's affordable for
            everybody.<span class="trope"> We should have a path to legal status for the 12 million <span class="immigrant">people</span> that are here
            illegally. It means, come out from the shadows, pay a fine, earn legal status by
            working, by paying taxes, learning English. Not committing crimes and earn legal status
            where you're not cutting in front of the line for people that are patiently waiting
            outside.</span> [applause] I think that is the — I think that's the conservative consensus
            pragmatic approach to how to solve this problem.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech204">[source] </a>That beautiful young woman who's an entrepreneur who served in the
            military, first of all, is deserving of our respect for service in the military and the
            fact that she's an entrepreneur. [applause] <span class="trope">And we should be a welcoming nation. Our
            identity is not based on race or ethnicity, it's based on a set of shared values.</span> That's
            American citizenship. And Dulce Candy — a pretty cool name, actually — that is now an
            entrepreneur over Youtube is part of that American spirit, and we should celebrate it as
            conservatives. That's what we believe in. You can — you can deal with the threat of
            terror and also recognize that this country should be aspirational across the
            board.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech186">[source] </a>Great question. I feel like I have to get into my inner Chris
            Christie, and point out that the reason why I should be president is listening to two
            senators talk about arcane amendments to bills that didn't pass. [applause] This is —
            this is the problem. We need a leader to fix this problem. And I have a detailed plan to
            do just that, including controlling the <span class="keyword">border</span>, dealing
            with the <span class="keyword">visa over-stayers</span>, making sure that we
            have a path to legal status, not to citizenship, for <span class="immigrant">those that come out from the shadows</span> and pay a fine, learn
            English, don't commit crimes, work and pay taxes. That is the better approach.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech188">[source] </a>
         <span class="trope">The great
                majority of <span class="immigrant">people</span> that come
                to this country come because they have no other choice. They want to come to provide
                for their families. That doesn't mean it's right. That doesn't mean it's right. We
                should pick who comes to our country.</span> We should control our <span class="keyword">border</span>. Coming here legally should be a lot easier than
            coming here illegally. <span class="trope">But the
                motivation, they're not all rapists, as you-know-who said. They're not that. These
                are <span class="immigrant">people</span> that are coming to
                provide for their families. And we should show a little more respect for the fact
                that they're struggling. It doesn't mean we shouldn't be controlling the <span class="keyword">border</span>. That's exactly what we should be
            doing.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech199">[source] </a>... The simple fact is I've also laid out my plans on [inaudible]
                <span class="immigration">immigration</span>...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech54">[source] </a>
            <span class="trope">I do. I believe that the great
                majority of people coming here illegally have no other option. They want to provide
                for their family.</span>
            <span class="platform">But we need to control our
                <span class="keyword">border</span>. It's not ...it's our responsibility to pick and choose who comes in.</span>
            So I ...I've written a book about this and yet this week, I did come up with a
            comprehensive strategy that ...that really mirrored what we said in the book, which is
            that we need to deal with <span class="keyword">E-Verify</span>, we need to deal
            with people that come with a legal <span class="keyword">visa and
                overstay</span>. We need to be much more strategic on how we deal with <span class="keyword">border enforcement</span>, <span class="keyword">border
                security</span>. We need to eliminate the <span class="keyword">sanctuary cities</span> in this country. <span class="trope">It is ridiculous and tragic...[applause]...that people are dying
                because of the fact that ...that local governments are not following the federal
                law.</span> 
         <span class="trope">There's much to do. And I think rather than talking about this as a
            wedge issue, which Barack Obama has done now for six long years, the next president
            ...and I hope to be that president ...will fix this once and for all so that we can turn
            this into a driver for high sustained economic growth.</span> 
         <span class="platform">And there should be a path to earned legal
                status...[timer sounds] ...for those that are here. Not ...<span class="keyword">not amnesty</span>, earned legal status, which means you pay a fine and do
                many things over an extended period of time.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech188">[source] </a> We've done it 27 times since World War II. I think we need to lift our spirits and have high, lofty expectations for this great country of ours.

The new normal of two percent that the left is saying you can't do anything about is so dangerous for our country. There's 6 million people living in poverty today, more than when Barack Obama got elected. 6.5 million people are working part-time, most of whom want to work full-time. We've created rules and taxes on top of every aspiration of people, and the net result is we're not growing fast, income's not growing. A four percent growth strategy means you fix a convoluted tax code. You get in and you change every aspect of regulations that are job killers. You get rid of Obamacare and replace it with something that doesn't suppress wages and kill jobs. [applause]

You embrace the energy revolution in our country. This president and Hillary Clinton, who can't even say she's for the XL pipeline even after she's left? Give me a break. Of course we're for it. We should be for these things to create high sustained economic growth. And frankly, [timer sounds] fixing our <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> and turning it into an economic driver is part of this as well. We can do this. [applause]

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech309">[source] </a> Here's what I believe. I believe we're at the verge of the greatest
            time to be alive in this world. But Washington is holding us back. How we tax, how we
            regulate. We're not embracing the energy revolution in our midst, a broken <span class="keyword">&gt;immigration system</span> that has been politicized
            rather than turning it into an economic driver. We're not protecting and preserving our
            entitlement system or reforming for the next generation. All these things languish while
            we have politicians in Washington using these as wedge issues. Here's my commitment to
            you, because I did it as Florida. We can fix these things. We can grow economically and
            restore America's leadership in the world, so that everybody has a chance to rise up. I
            humbly ask for your vote, whenever you're gonna get to vote, whenever the primary is.
            Thank you all very much. </p>
      <h2>CARSON</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech262">[source] </a> Well, first of all, I recognize that we have an incredible
                <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> problem. I was down in Arizona a few weeks ago at the
                <span class="keyword">border</span>. I mean, the fences that were there were
            not manned, and those are the kind of fences when I was a kid that would barely slow us
            down. So, I don't see any purpose in having that. Now, what we need to do is look at
            something that actually works. Yuma County, Arizona. They stop 97 percent of the
                <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>
            through there. They put in a double fence with a road so that there was quick access by
            the enforcement people. If we don't seal the <span class="keyword">border</span>,
            the rest of this stuff clearly doesn't matter. It's kind of ridiculous all the other
            things we talk about. We have the ability to do it, we don't have the will to do it.
            There was one area where they had cut a hole in the fence, and to repair it, they put a
            few strands of barb wire across. Well, the photographers who were there with us, they
            wanted to photograph us from the side of the Mexicans, and they went through there, and
            they were not physically fit people, and they took their cameras and things with them,
            and shot us from the other side. That's how easy it is to get across. And, the drugs, I
            mean, it goes on, and on, and on. ICE tells them to release these people, 67,000
            criminals released... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech303">[source] </a> Well, what I said, after we seal the <span class="keyword">borders</span>, after we turn off the spigot that dispenses all the goodies so
            we don't have people coming in here, including employment, that people who had a
            pristine record, we should consider allowing them to become <span class="immigrant">guest workers</span>, primarily in
            the agricultural sphere, because that's the place where Americans don't seem to want to
            work. That's what I said. And they have a six-month period to do that. If they don't do
            it within that time period, then they become illegal, and as <span class="immigrant">illegals</span>, they will be
            treated as such. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech316">[source] </a> My plan is not <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> for a
            number of reasons. Number one, you know, I've talked to farmers, and they said they
            cannot hire Americans to do the kind of job that I'm talking about. And the second
            reason is because the individuals who register as <span class="immigrant">guest workers</span>, they don't get to vote,
            they are not American citizens, and they don't get the rights and privileges of American
            citizens. So that's key. But the other thing that I want to bring up is, I mentioned
            something earlier. I think it was just sort of glossed over. I talked about the success
            in Yuma County, I mean, incredible success, and the Department of Justice said, "No, we
            don't want to do that. That's too successful." We don't have to keep reinventing the
            wheel. All we have to do is look at things that work. All we have to do is use a little
            common sense. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech997">[source] </a> Well, first of all, I recognize that we have an incredible
                    <span class="immigration">illegal
                    immigration</span> problem. I was down in Arizona a few weeks ago at the
                    <span class="keyword">border</span>. I mean, the fences that were there were
                not manned, and those are the kind of fences when I was a kid that would barely slow
                us down. So, I don't see any purpose in having that. Now, what we need to do is look
                at something that actually works. Yuma County, Arizona. They stop 97 percent of the
                    <span class="immigrant">illegal
                    immigrants</span> through there. They put in a double fence with a road so
                that there was quick access by the enforcement people. If we don't seal the <span class="keyword">border</span>, the rest of this stuff clearly doesn't matter.
                It's kind of ridiculous all the other things we talk about. We have the ability to
                do it, we don't have the will to do it. There was one area where they had cut a hole
                in the fence, and to repair it, they put a few strands of barb wire across. Well,
                the photographers who were there with us, they wanted to photograph us from the side
                of the Mexicans, and they went through there, and they were not physically fit
                people, and they took their cameras and things with them, and shot us from the other
                side. That's how easy it is to get across. And, the drugs, I mean, it goes on, and
                on, and on. ICE tells them to release these people, 67,000 criminals released... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1038">[source] </a> Well, what I said, after we seal the <span class="keyword">borders</span>, after we turn off the spigot that dispenses all the goodies
                so we don't have people coming in here, including employment, that people who had a
                pristine record, we should consider allowing them to become <span class="immigrant">guest workers</span>, primarily in the
                agricultural sphere, because that's the place where Americans don't seem to want to
                work. That's what I said. And they have a six-month period to do that. If they don't
                do it within that time period, then they become illegal, and as <span class="immigrant">illegals</span>, they will be treated as
                such. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1051">[source] </a> My plan is not <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> for a
                number of reasons. Number one, you know, I've talked to farmers, and they said they
                cannot hire Americans to do the kind of job that I'm talking about. And the second
                reason is because the individuals who register as <span class="immigrant">guest workers</span>, they don't get to vote, they are
                not American citizens, and they don't get the rights and privileges of American
                citizens. So that's key. But the other thing that I want to bring up is, I mentioned
                something earlier. I think it was just sort of glossed over. I talked about the
                success in Yuma County, I mean, incredible success, and the Department of Justice
                said, "No, we don't want to do that. That's too successful." We don't have to keep
                reinventing the wheel. All we have to do is look at things that work. All we have to
                do is use a little common sense. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech296">[source] </a> Well, it was very interesting having an opportunity to talk to the
        Syrians themselves. And I asked them: What do you want? What is your supreme desire? Their
        supreme desire was to be settled back in their own country. I said, "What can Americans and
        other countries do?" They said, "Support the efforts of those who are trying to provide
        safety for us, including the Jordanians." Of course, they had a brand new hospital, for
        instance, that was unstaffed because there wasn't enough money to do it. But here's what's
        really neat. If you go into Hasakah province in northeast Syria, that's an area that's as
        big as Lebanon. It's controlled by the Kurds, the Christians and the moderate Sunnis. And
        there are airstrips and hotels. You could settle a lot of people there. All we would have to
        do is be willing to provide them with some weaponry, some defensive weaponry. And we seem to
        be afraid to give the Kurds weaponry. We like to send it for some strange reason through
        Baghdad, and then they only get a tenth of it. And if we would support them, we'd have a
        perfect ideal there. We don't need to set this up as we either take a bunch of <span class="keyword">refugees</span> who
        will be infiltrated with terrorists, I guarantee you. For them not to be would be terrorist
        malpractice. And we need to — to choose the right choice, not these false choices.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech114">[source] </a>Well, I don't know about the GOP messaging, but I can tell you
            about my messaging. You know, need to stop allowing political correctness to dictate our
            policies, because it's going to kill us if we don't. [applause] And in the Holy Land
            Foundation trial in 2006 in Texas, they had a memorandum, an explanatory memorandum that
            talked about the fact that Americans would be easy to overcome and to commit
            civilization jihad because they were going to be trying to protect the rights of the
            very people who were trying to subvert them. <span class="trope">But I believe in the Teddy Roosevelt philosophy. Teddy Roosevelt
                said, we are a nation of <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. As such, everybody is welcome from any race, any
                country, any religion, if they want to be Americans. If they want to accept our
                values and our laws</span>. If not, they can stay where they are.
            [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech201">[source] </a>Oh, great. [laughter] As I said before, we are a land of
            <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, but we have to be intelligent about the way that we form our <span class="immigration">immigration</span>
            policies, and that's one of the reasons that I have called on us to declare war on the
            Islamic State because we need to reorient our <span class="immigration">immigration</span> policies and our visa policies
            for people who are coming into this country because there are many people out there who
            want to destroy us. Now, I recognize that the vast majority of people coming in here
            probably are not those kinds of people, but that's not good enough.<span class="trope"> If you've got 10
            people coming to your house and you know one of them is a terrorist, you're probably
            going to keep them all out. You know, we probably have to figure out a way to make sure
            that we keep America safe.</span> [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech211">[source] </a>Well, first of all, please go to my website, bencarson.com, and
            read my <span class="immigration">immigration</span> policy,
            O.K.? Because it actually makes sense. Now, the — as far as these fines are concerned,
            you know? Here's the big problem. We've got all these government regulators, and all
            they're doing is running around looking for people to fine. And we've got 645 different
            federal agencies and sub-agencies. Way, way too many, and they don't have anything else
            to do. I think what we really need to do is start trimming the regulatory agencies
            rather than going after the people who are trying to increase the viability, economic
            viability of our society. Now, that doesn't mean there aren't some people out there who
            are doing bad things. But I'm not sure that the way to solve that problem is by
            increasing all the regulatory burden. You know, when you consider how much regulations
            cost us each year, you know? $2 trillion dollars per family, $24,000 per family, that
            happens to be the same level as the poverty level...[bell rings]... for a family of
            four. If you want to get rid of poverty, get rid of all the regulations.</p>
      <h2>CHRISTIE</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech258">[source] </a> First of, Jake, I don't yield to anybody on how to enforce the
            law. I'm the only person on this stage who spent seven years as a United States Attorney
            after September 11th, and I know how to do this. The fact is though that for 15,000
            people a day to be deported every day for two years is an undertaking that almost none
            of us could accomplish given the current levels of funding, and the current number of
            law enforcement officers. Here's what we need to do, and I think this is where Donald is
            absolutely right. What we need to do is to secure our <span class="keyword">border</span>, and we need to do it with more than just a <span class="keyword">wall</span>. We need to use electronics, we need to use drones, we need to use
            FBI, DEA, and ATF, and yes, we need to take the fingerprint of every person who comes
            into this country on a visa, and when they <span class="keyword">overstay their visa</span>, we need to tap them on
            the shoulder, and say, "You have overstayed your welcome, you're taking advantage of the
            American people. It's time for you to go." If we had that kind of system in place, we
            wouldn't have the 11 million people we have now. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech993">[source] </a> First of, Jake, I don't yield to anybody on how to enforce
                the law. I'm the only person on this stage who spent seven years as a United States
                Attorney after September 11th, and I know how to do this. The fact is though that
                for 15,000 people a day to be deported every day for two years is an undertaking
                that almost none of us could accomplish given the current levels of funding, and the
                current number of law enforcement officers. Here's what we need to do, and I think
                this is where Donald is absolutely right. What we need to do is to secure our
                    <span class="keyword">border</span>, and we need to do it with more than
                just a <span class="keyword">wall</span>. We need to use electronics, we need to
                use drones, we need to use FBI, DEA, and ATF, and yes, we need to take the
                fingerprint of every person who comes into this country on a visa, and when they
                overstay their visa, we need to tap them on the shoulder, and say, "You have
                overstayed your welcome, you're taking advantage of the American people. It's time
                for you to go." If we had that kind of system in place, we wouldn't have the 11
                million people we have now. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech373">[source] </a> Carl, are we really talking about getting government involved in
            fantasy football? [laughter] We have — wait a second, we have $19 trillion in debt. We
            have people out of work. We have ISIS and al Qaeda attacking us. And we're talking about
            fantasy football? Can we stop? [applause] How about this? How about we get the
            government to do what they're supposed to be doing, secure our <span class="keyword">borders</span>, protect our
            people, and support American values and American families. Enough on fantasy football.
            Let people play, who cares? [crosstalk]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech306">[source] </a> What I say to Carla is that the first job of the president of the
        United States is to protect your safety and your security and the security and safety of
        your family. And this debate stops with me in the discussions with the FBI director. <span class="anecdote">Now,
        listen, I'm a former federal prosecutor, I know Jim Comey. We've worked together. He was the
        U.S. attorney in Manhattan when I was a U.S. attorney in New Jersey. And when Jim Comey gets
        up before Congress and says, we cannot effectively vet these people, for me as president,
        that's the end of the conversation. We have to put America's security first.</span> [applause] The
        American people — we on this stage need to open our ears. We need to open our ears. The
        American people are not whispering to us. They are screaming to us. And they're screaming to
        us that it's our job to actually make this government work. It's so dysfunctional under
        Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton. It's so ineffective. It's so ineffectual that the American
        people say, we don't trust them to do anything anymore. So I'm not going to let <span class="immigrant">Syrian
        refugees</span>, any <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span> in this country. And it was widows and orphans, by the way,
        and we now know from watching the San Bernardino attack that women can commit heinous,
        heinous acts against humanity just the same as men can do it. And so I don't back away from
        that position for a minute. When the FBI director tells me that he can vet those people,
        then we'll consider it and not a moment before because your safety and security is what's
        most important to me. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech114">[source] </a>Maria, you look at what this president and his secretary of
            state, Secretary of State Clinton, has done to get us in this spot. You think about it —
            this is the president who said, along with his secretary of state — drew a red line in
            Syria, said, if Assad uses chemical weapons against his people, that we're going to
            attack. He used chemical weapons, he's killed, now, over a quarter of a million of his
            own people, and this president has done nothing. In fact, he's done worse than nothing.
            This president — and, by the way, Secretary Clinton, who called Assad a reformer — she
            called Assad a reformer. Now, the fact is, what this president has done is invited
            Russia to play an even bigger role, bring in Vladimir Putin to negotiate getting those
            chemical weapons back from Assad, yet what do we have today? We have the Russians and
            the Iranians working together, not to fight ISIS, but to prop up Assad. The fact of the
            matter is we're not going to have peace — we are not going to have peace in Syria. We're
            not going to be able to rebuild it unless we put a no-fly zone there, make it safe for
            those folks so we don't have to be talking about <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span> anymore. The Syrians should stay
            in Syria. They shouldn't be going to Europe. And here's the last
            piece...[applause]...you're not going to have peace in Syria with Assad in charge.
            You're simply not. And so Senator Graham is right about this. And if we want to try to
            rebuild the coalition, as Governor Kasich was saying before, then what we better do is
            to get to the Arab countries that believe that ISIS is a threat, not only to them, but
            to us and to world peace, and bring them together. And believe me, Assad is not worth
            it. And if you're going to leave this to Hillary Clinton, the person who gave us this
            foreign policy, the architect of it, and you're going to give her another four years,
            that's why I'm speaking out as strongly as I am about that. Hillary Clinton cannot be
            president. It will lead to even greater war in this world. And remember this, after
            Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama have had nearly 8 years, we have fewer democracies in
            the world than we had when they started. That makes the world less peaceful, less safe.
            In my administration, we will help to make sure we bring people together in the Middle
            East, and we will fight ISIS and defeat them.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech128">[source] </a>Now Maria, listen. I said right from the beginning that we should
            take no <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span> of
            any kind. And the reason I said that is because the FBI director told the American
            people, told Congress, that he could not guarantee he could vet them and it would be
            safe. That's the end of the conversation. I can tell you, after spending seven years as
            a former federal prosecutor, right after 9/11, dealing with this issue. Here's the way
            you need to deal with it. You can't just ban all Muslims. You have to ban radical
            Islamic jihadists. You have to ban the people who are trying to hurt us. The only way to
            figure that out is to go back to getting the intelligence community the funding and the
            tools that it needs to be able to keep America safe. [bell rings] And this summer, we
            didn't do that. We took it away from the NSA, it was a bad decision by the president.
            Bad by those in the Senate who voted for it and if I'm president, we'll make our
            intelligence community strong, and won't have to keep everybody out, we're just going to
            keep the bad folk out and make sure they don't harm us.</p>
      <h2>CLINTON</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech293">[source] </a>
            <span class="trope">Well, first of all, I want to make
                sure every child gets health care.</span>
            <span class="trope">That's why I helped to create the
                Children's Health Insurance Program, and I want to support states that are expanding
                health care and including <span class="immigrant">undocumented children</span> and others.</span> I want to open up the
            opportunity for <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> to
            be able to buy in to the exchanges under the Affordable Care Act. I think to go beyond
            that, as I understand what Governor O'Malley has recommended, so that they would get the
            same subsidies. I think that is — it raises so many issues. It would be very difficult
            to administer, it needs to be part of a comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, when we finally do get to it. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech307">[source] </a> Demonize hard-working <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> who have insulted them. You know, I came
            to Las Vegas in, I think, May. Early may. Met with a group of DREAMers, I wish everybody
            in America could meet with this young people, to hear their stories, to know their
            incredible talent, their determination, and that's why I would go further. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech63">[source] </a> I think that is the number one requirement. I also said that we
            should take increased numbers of <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. The administration originally said 10. I said
            we should go to 65, but only if we have as careful a screening and vetting process as we
            can imagine, whatever resources it takes because I do not want us to, in any way,
            inadvertently allow people who wish us harm to come into our country. But I want to say
            a quick word about what Senator Sanders and then Governor O'Malley said. We do have to
            take a hard look at the defense budget and we do have to figure out how we get ready to
            fight the adversaries of the future, not the past. But we have to also be very clear
            that we do have some continuing challenges. We've got challenges in the South China Sea
            because of what China is doing in building up these military installations. We have
            problems with Russia. Just the other day, Russia allowed a television camera to see the
            plans for a drone submarine that could carry a tactical nuclear weapon. So we've got to
            look at the full range and then come to some smart decisions about having more
            streamlined and focused approach. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech94">[source] </a> Well, first of all, I know that the President has appealed the
            decision to the Supreme Court. And my reading of the law and the Constitution convinces
            me that the President has the authority that he is attempting to exercise with respect
            to dreamers and their parents, because I think all of us on this stage agree that we
            need <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> with a path to citizenship. Border security has
            always been a part of that debate. And it is a fact that the <span class="immigration">net immigration</span> from Mexico
            and South has basically zeroed out. <span class="trope">So, what we want to do is to say, look, we have 11
            million people who have been here, many of them for decades. They have children who are
            doing so well, I've met and worked with dreamers. I think any parent would be so proud
            of them. So let's move toward what we should be doing as a nation and follow the values
            of our <span class="immigrant">immigration history</span> and begin to make it possible for them to come out of the
            shadows and to have a future that gives them a full <span class="keyword">chance of citizenship</span>.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech89">[source] </a> I don't think a halt is necessary. What we have to do is put all of
            our resources through the Department of Homeland Security, through the State Department,
            through our intelligence agencies, and we have to have an increased vetting and
            screening. Now, this takes, David, 18 months to 24 months, two years. So I know it's not
            going to happen overnight and everything that can be done should be done. But the
            process should move forward while we are also taking on ISIS, putting together the kind
            of strategy that I've advocated for, and making sure that the vetting and the screening
            is as tough as possible. <span class="trope">Because I do believe that
                we have a history and a tradition, that is part of our values system and we don't
                want to sacrifice our values. We don't want to make it seem as though we are turning
                into a nation of fear instead of a nation of resolve. So I want us to have a very
                tough screening process but I want that process to go forward.</span> And if at the
            end of 18 months, 24 months there are people who have been cleared, and I would
            prioritize widows, and orphans, and the elderly, people who may have relatives,
            families, or have nowhere else to go. I would prioritize them. And that would I think
            give the American public a bit more of a sense of security about who is being processed
            and who might end up coming as <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech118">[source] </a> Martha, that -- you know, one of the reasons why I have advocated for
            a no-fly zone is in order to create those safe refuges within Syria, to try to protect
            people on the ground both from Assad's forces, who are continuing to drop barrel bombs,
            and from ISIS. And of course, it has to be de-conflicted with the Russians, who are also
            flying in that space. I'm hoping that because of the very recent announcement of the
            agreement at the Security Council, which embodies actually an agreement that I
            negotiated back in Geneva in June of 2012, we're going to get a diplomatic effort in
            Syria to begin to try to make a transition. A no-fly zone would prevent the outflow of
                <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> and give us a chance
            to have some safe spaces. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-01-17.xhtml#speech9">[source] </a> I would work quickly to present to the Congress my plans for creating
            more good jobs in manufacturing, infrastructure, clean and renewable energy, raising the
            minimum wage, and guaranteeing, finally, equal pay for women's work. I would
            also...[applause]...I would also be presenting my plans to build on the Affordable Care
            Act and to improve it by decreasing the out-of-pocket costs by putting a cap on
            prescription drug costs; by looking for ways that we can put the prescription drug
            business and the health insurance company business on a more stable platform that
            doesn't take too much money out of the pockets of hard-working Americans. And third, I
            would be working, in every way that I knew, to bring our country together. We do have
            too much division, too much mean- spiritedness. There's a lot we have to do on
            <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, on voting rights, on campaign finance reform, but we need to do it
            together. That's how we'll have the kind of country for the 21st century that we know
            will guarantee our children and grandchildren the kind of future they deserve.
            [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech202">[source] </a> Well, I—I don't accept that premise, Chuck. I think that we've got so much business we have to do. We've talked a lot tonight about what we're against—we're against income inequality. We're against the abuses of powerful interests. We're against a lot of things.

I'm for a lot of things. I don't want to just stop bad things from happening, I want to start good things from happening. And I believe, if I'm so fortunate to get the nomination, I will begin to work immediately on putting together an agenda, beginning to talk with members of Congress and others about how we can push forward.

I want to have half a billion more solar panels deployed, the first four years. [applause]

I want to have enough clean energy to power every home the next four years. I want us to keep working on the Affordable Care Act, to get not only to 100 percent coverage, but bring down the costs of prescription drugs and out-of-pocket costs.

I want to move forward on paid family leave, on early childhood education, I want us to do more for small businesses. [applause]

Small businesses have to create most of the jobs, and we're not creating and growing small businesses. I think, if you have a smart agenda, you pick the committees that you know have to begin to work on these various pieces—because that's the way Congress is set up. You go through different committees, and you really make a big push in the beginning.

<span class="keyword">Immigration reform</span>, economic revitalization with manufacturing, with infrastructure—we put it out there, and we begin to work on an ambitious, big, bold agenda that will actually produce the results that I want to see for our country.

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech209">[source] </a> The answer to both of those is no. I'm interested in making what we have work better. I want to streamline programs that are duplicative and redundant. I want to have a top-to-bottom review about what works and what doesn't work, and be absolutely clear we're getting rid of what doesn't work.

I have had the opportunity to run a big agency. I was very flattered when Henry Kissinger said I ran the State Department better—better than anybody had run it in a long time. So I have an idea of what it's going to take to make our government work more efficiently.

And when you put together a budget, you have to make a lot of hard decisions, but I think it's not appropriate to say "I'm going to get rid of this, get rid of that" until you have a very good process that gives you the information about what to do.

But I want to add something else, you know, because look, we have so much work to do in our country, and I think it's the greatest work that Americans will be called to do. And of course, we have to have people in every community involved in it. We have to have the political voice, the political grassroots speaking up and speaking out about what we have to try to accomplish in Washington.

But we also need to have a very clear set of goals that we are going to achieve, and we need to level with the American people about what they are, what they will cost, what will be expected of our citizenry. So I see as president having a constant dialogue with Americans here's what we're trying to get done, here's why I need your help, here's why you may think comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> with a path to citizenship isn't something you care about, but I'm telling you it will help fix the labor market, it will bring people out of the shadows—

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-11.xhtml#speech61">[source] </a> I strongly support the president's executive actions. I hope the
            Supreme Court upholds them. I think there is constitutional and legal authority for the
            president to have done what he did. I am against the raids. I'm against the kind of
            inhumane treatment that is now being visited upon families, waking them up in the middle
            of the night, rounding them up. We should be deporting criminals, not hardworking
            immigrant families who do the very best they can and often are keeping economies going
            in many places in our country. I'm a strong supporter of comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration
            reform</span>. Have been ever since I was in the Senate. I was one of the original sponsors of
            the DREAM Act. I voted for comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> in 2007. Senator Sanders
            voted against it at that time. Because I think we have to get to comprehensive
            <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> with a <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>. And as president I would expand enormous
            energy, literally call every member of Congress that I thought I could persuade.
            Hopefully after the 2016 election, some of the Republicans will come to their senses and
            realize we are not going to deport 11 or 12 million people in this country. And they
            will work with me to get comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>.[applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech9">[source] </a> Thank you very much. I've been looking forward to this
                debate, and I want to thank Univision, the Washington Post, Facebook and Miami-Dade
                College, the largest college in North America for hosting us here this evening.
                [applause] And tonight I am looking forward to the opportunity to discuss how we
                knock down the barriers that stand in the way of people getting ahead and staying
                ahead, starting with the economic ones. My focus is on more good paying jobs with
                rising incomes for families and how we prevent corporations from taking jobs out of
                our country by imposing an exit tax, making them pay back any tax breaks they've
                gotten. But we also need to be having a positive agenda for manufacturing. for small
                businesses and entrepreneurs, for more clean energy jobs. And I also look forward to
                discussing comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration
                    reform</span> with a <span class="keyword">path to
                    citizenship</span> that will be one of my priorities in my first 100 days as
                president. And I will also be talking about education, every child deserves a good
                teacher and a good school. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech40">[source] </a> In 2003, I sponsored the DREAMER Act. I sponsored I think in
                every Congress after that. I have been consistent and committed to <span class="trope">
            <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> with a
                        <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>.</span> I
                think our best chance was in 2007, when Ted Kennedy led the charge on <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>. We have
                Republican support. We had a president willing to sign it. I voted for that bill.
                Senator Sanders voted against it. Just think, imagine where we would be today is we
                had achieved <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                    reform</span> nine years ago. Imagine how much more secure families would be
                in our country, no longer fearing the deportation of a loved one; no longer fearing
                that they would be found out. So I am staunchly in favor of <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> and have
                been so over the course of my public career. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech47">[source] </a> If I could...[applause] You know, I think it's very hard to
                make the case that Ted Kennedy, Barack Obama, me, La Raza, United Farmworkers,
                Dolores Huerta, leaders of the Latino community, would have supported a bill that
                actually promoted modern slavery. That was one of the many excuses used not to vote
                for the 2007 bill. And I will go back to what I said. If we had been able to get
                that passed, we would be so much further along now. I'm committed to defending DAPA
                and DACA. I'm committed to going even further to get more people deferred action, to
                go as far as I can under the law. And I am committed to introducing <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> with a
                    <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span> in the first
                100 days of my presidency. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech50">[source] </a> Let me — let me respond again because the misrepresentation
                can't go unanswered here. First of all, that is something that is not fair about
                what I said. I did say we needed to be very concerned about little children coming
                to this country — on their own, very often — many of them not making it. And when
                they got here, they needed, as I have argued for, legal counsel, due process, to
                make a decision. We need to end private detention, we need to end family detention.
                And in 2006, when Senator Sanders was running for the Senate from Vermont, he voted
                in the House with hard-line Republicans for indefinite detention for <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                    immigrants</span>, and then he sided with those Republicans to stand with
                vigilantes known as Minute Men who were taking up outposts along the border to hunt
                down <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. So I think
                when you were running for the Senate, you made it clear by your vote, Senator, that
                you were going to stand with the Republicans. When you got to the Senate in 2007,
                one of the first things you did was vote against Ted Kennedy's <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> which he'd been working
                on for years before you ever arrived. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech65">[source] </a> Yes, you can because the question you were asking me were
                about children seeking asylum. And we have laws. That was the most critical thing I
                said. Under our laws. I would like to see those laws changed. I would like see added
                to them, a guaranteed counsel and other support for <span class="immigrant">children</span>. But if you are asking about everyone who
                is already here, <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span>, the 11-12 million who are living here, my
                priorities are to deport violent criminals, terrorists, and anyone who threatens our
                safety. So I do not have the same policy as the current administration does. I think
                it's important that we move to our <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span>, but at the same time, stop the raids, stop the
                round-ups, stop the deporting of people who are living here doing their lives, doing
                their jobs, and that's my priority. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech67">[source] </a> I will not deport <span class="immigrant">children</span>. I would not deport <span class="immigrant">children</span>. I do not want to deport <span class="immigrant">family members</span> either, Jorge. I
                want to, as I said, prioritize who would be deported: violent criminals, people
                planning terrorist attacks, anybody who threatens us. That's a relatively small
                universe. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech71">[source] </a> That's what I'm telling you. Now I don't want — because I'm
                not contradicting what I told you in the interview. <span class="keyword">Asylum</span> is a particular legal process. I'd like to see it changed. I'd
                like to see us give more support to people who come fleeing the terrible violence
                that they do. But under our law, we have a process we have to go [through which is
                different. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech77">[source] </a> Of the people, the <span class="immigrant">undocumented people</span> living in our
                country, I do not want to see them deported. I want to see them on a <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>. That is exactly what I
                will do. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech82">[source] </a> This is why I go back to that 2007 vote because if we had
                been successful then, a lot of the issues we are still discussing today would be in
                the rear-view mirror. I want us to be able to achieve <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> if I'm so
                fortunate enough to be president. And we do have to take a look at asylum laws. When
                I was secretary of state, I worked to try to support many different approaches to
                ending the violence in Central America. I was there meeting with leaders, security
                leaders, and others. And I think the Congress should support the president's request
                to fund programs that would protect people and change the culture of criminality and
                violence in Central America, helping people be able to stay safely in their homes
                and countries. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech84">[source] </a> Let me just conclude by saying that United Farm Workers
                considered that bill in their words the last best hope for farm workers and
                    <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. They have
                proven to be right in the succeeding years. I only hope that we can put together a
                coalition to pass <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                    reform</span> in the next Congress. And as I said earlier, in 2006, Senator
                Sanders supported indefinite detention for people facing deportation... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech86">[source] </a> ...and stood with the Minutemen vigilantes in their
                ridiculous, absurd efforts to, quote, "hunt down <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. So look, I think the goal here is to
                elect a Democratic Senate, elect a Democratic president and get to work immediately
                to get <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                reform</span>. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech107">[source] </a> Well, I think both of us, both Senator Sanders and I, voted
                numerous times to enhance <span class="keyword">border security</span> along our
                    <span class="keyword">border</span>. We increased the number of <span class="keyword"> border security agents</span>. We did vote for money to build
                a <span class="keyword">fence</span>, a <span class="keyword">pedestrian
                    fence</span> in some place, a <span class="keyword">vehicle fence</span> in
                other places. And the result is that we have the most secure border we've ever had.
                Apprehensions coming across <span class="keyword">the border</span> are the
                lowest they've been in 40 years, which just strengthens my argument that now it's
                time to do <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                    reform</span>. The Republicans, the opponents no longer have an argument. And
                certainly, we hear a lot coming from the Republican side that is absolutely out of
                touch with reality. We raised money [through the congressional appropriations
                process. We enhanced the <span class="keyword">border security</span>. That part
                of the work is done. Everybody that I know has looked at it said, okay, we have a
                secure <span class="keyword">border</span>. There's no need for this rhetoric
                and demagoguery that's still —is carried out on the Republican side. You've run out
                of excuses. Let's move to <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span> with a <span class="keyword">path to
                    citizenship</span>. And I think that makes a very strong argument in favor of
                doing it. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech109">[source] </a> It's a big difference. First of all, as I understand him,
                he's talking about <span class="keyword">a very tall wall</span>. [laughter]
                Right? <span class="keyword">A beautiful tall wall</span>. <span class="keyword">The most beautiful tall wall</span>, better than the Great Wall of China,
                that would run the entire border. That he would somehow magically get the Mexican
                government to pay for. And, you know, it's just fantasy. And in fact, if he cared to
                know anything about what members of Congress, like the senator and I have done,
                where it was necessary, we did support <span class="keyword">some fencing</span>.
                Where it was necessary, we did add border patrol agents. We have done what by any
                fair estimate would have to conclude is a good job, quote, "securing the border". So
                let's get about the business of <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span>. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech181">[source] </a> Everything I just said will improve the living conditions,
                and I've spent a lot of time and effort talking to and mostly listening to Latinos.
                Jobs are the number one issue, with rising incomes. Close behind is education. Every
                child deserves a good teacher in a good school, regardless of the zip code that they
                live in. Following behind that is health care and how important it is to continue to
                build on the Affordable Care Act and provide access to health care. And then there
                are a number of other issues — <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span> certainly at the top. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-04-14.xhtml#speech216">[source] </a> Well, let me say I think we did a great deal to help the Libyan
        people after Qadafi's demise. And here's what we did. We helped them hold two successful
        elections, something that is not easy, which they did very well because they had a pent up
        desire to try to chart their own future after 42 years of dictatorship. I was very proud of
        that. We got rid of the chemical weapons stockpile that Qadafi had, getting it out of Libya,
        getting it away from militias or terrorist groups. We also worked to help them set up their
        government. We sent a lot of American experts there. We offered to help them secure their
            <span class="keyword">borders</span>, to train a new military. They, at the end,
        when it came to security issues, Wolf, did not want troops from any other country, not just
        us, European or other countries, in Libya. And so we were caught in a very difficult
        position. They could not provide security on their own, which we could see and we told them
        that, but they didn't want to have others helping to provide that security. And the result
        has been a clash between different parts of the country, terrorists taking up some locations
        in the country. And we can't walk away from that. We need to be working with European and
        Arab partners... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-04-14.xhtml#speech226">[source] </a> We went to the United Nations — yes, he did. We went to the United
        Nations Security Council. We got support from the Security Council. And we then supported
        the efforts of our European and Arab allies and partners. This was a request made to our
        government by the Europeans and by the Arabs because of their great fear of what chaos in
        Syria would do to them. And if you want to know what chaos does, not just to the people
        inside but the people on the <span class="keyword">borders</span>, look at Syria. Nobody
        stood up to Assad and removed him, and we have had a far greater disaster in Syria than we
        are currently dealing with right now in Libya. [applause] [crosstalk] </p>
      <h2>COONEY</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech91">[source] </a> Thanks, John. Candidates, we've already heard your answers on what you
            would do with <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span>, but a crucial part of the <span class="keyword">immigration debate</span> here at home
            is control of our own borders. Republicans say the borders -- securing borders is a top
            priority. Democrats say they want to plan for <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>. So,
            Governor O'Malley, are you willing to compromise on this particular issue to focus on
            border security first in favor of keeping the country safe? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech93">[source] </a> Thank you. Now, Secretary Clinton said you would go further than the
            President when it comes to taking executive action to implement <span class="keyword">immigration reforms</span>. But
            the President's already facing legal trouble on this. We've seen it more just in the
            past week. Realistically, how could you go further with executive action? </p>
      <h2>COOPER</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech10">[source] </a> Thank you, all. It is time to start the debate.

Are you all ready? [applause]

All right. Let's begin. We're going to be discussing a lot of the issues, many of the issues, important issues that you have brought up. But I want to begin with concerns that voters have about each of the candidates here on this stage that they have about each of you.

Secretary Clinton, I want to start with you. Plenty of politicians evolve on issues, but even some Democrats believe you change your positions based on political expediency.

You were against same-sex marriage. Now you're for it. You defended President Obama's <span class="keyword">immigration policies</span>. Now you say they're too harsh. You supported his trade deal dozen of times. You even called it the "gold standard". Now, suddenly, last week, you're against it.

Will you say anything to get elected?

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech286">[source] </a> Senator Sanders, I want to bring it over to Juan Carlos Lopez from
            CNN en Espanol. We're obviously in Nevada. It's had the highest percentage of
                <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                immigrants</span> of any state in the country as of last year. Juan Carlos? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech310">[source] </a> Secretary Clinton, let me ask you. Two of your rivals from your
            left, Governor O'Malley, and Senator Sanders, want to provide instate college tuition to
                <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                immigrants</span>. Where do you stand on that? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech312">[source] </a> So, on the record, you believe that <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> should get
            instate college tuition. </p>
      <h2>CRUZ</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech72">[source] </a> Chris, absolutely yes. And not only will I support
            it...[applause]...I have authored Kate's law in the United States Senate and filed that
            legislation. I tried to get the Senate to vote to pass Kate's law on the floor of the
            Senate just one week ago, and the leader of our own party blocked a vote on Kate's law.
            You know, there was reference made to our leaders being stupid. It's not a question of
            stupidity. <span class="trope">It's that they don't want to enforce the <span class="immigration">immigration laws</span>. That there are far too many
            in the Washington cartel that support <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>.
                President Obama has talked about fundamentally transforming this country</span>. There's 7
            billion people across the face of the globe, many of whom want to come to this country.
            If they <span class="immigration">come legally</span>, great. But if they
            <span class="immigration">come ilegally</span> and they get <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, that is how we fundamentally change this country,
            and it really is striking. A majority of the candidates on this stage have supported
            <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. I have never supported <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, and I led the fight against Chuck Schumer's gang
            of eight <span class="keyword">amnesty legislation</span> in the Senate.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech280">[source] </a> Well, I am blessed to receive a word from God every day in receiving
            the scriptures and reading the scriptures. And God speaks through the Bible. [applause]
            I'm the son of a pastor and evangelist and I've described many times how my father, when
            I was a child, was an alcoholic. He wasn't a Christian. And my father left my mother and
            left me when I was just three years old. And someone invited him to Clay Road Baptist
            Church. And he gave his heart to Jesus and it turned him around. And he got on a plane
            and he flew back to my mother and me. [applause] I would also note that the scripture
            tells us, "you shall know them by their fruit." We see lots of "campaign conservatives."
            But if we're going to win in 2016, we need a consistent conservative, someone who has
            been a fiscal conservative, a social conservative, a national security conservative.
            There are real differences among the candidates on issues like <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, like Obamacare, like religious liberty, like life and marriage.
            And I have been proud to fight and stand for religious liberty, to stand against Planned
            Parenthood, to defend life for my entire career. And I will be proud to continue to do
            so as president of the United States.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech305">[source] </a> Well, Jake, you know, I'm — I'm very glad that Donald Trump's being
            in this race has forced the mainstream media finally to talk about <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>.
            I think that's very important. I like and respect Ben Carson. I'll let him talk about
            his own plans. But I will say this: The natural next question that primary voters are
            asking, after we focus on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is, okay, what are the records of the
            various candidates? And this is an issue on which there are stark differences. A
            majority of the men and women on this stage have previously and publicly embraced
                <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. I am the only candidate on this stage
            who has never supported <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> and, in fact, who
            helped lead the fight to stop a massive <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>
            plan. In 2013, when Barack Obama and Harry Reid joined the Washington Republicans in a
            massive, I stood shoulder to shoulder with Jeff Sessions helping lead the fight. You
            know, folks here have talked about, how do you secure the <span class="keyword">borders</span>? Well, I've been leading the fight in the Senate to triple the
            Border Patrol, to put in place fencings and <span class="keyword">wall</span>s, to
            put in place a strong biometric exit/entry system... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1040">[source] </a> Well, Jake, you know, I'm — I'm very glad that Donald Trump's
                being in this race has forced the mainstream media finally to talk about
                    <span class="immigration">illegal
                    immigration</span>. I think that's very important. I like and respect Ben
                Carson. I'll let him talk about his own plans. But I will say this: The natural next
                question that primary voters are asking, after we focus on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>
                is, okay, what are the records of the various candidates? And this is an issue on
                which there are stark differences. A majority of the men and women on this stage
                have previously and publicly embraced <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. I
                am the only candidate on this stage who has never supported <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> and, in fact, who helped lead the fight to stop a massive
                    <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> plan. In 2013, when Barack Obama and
                Harry Reid joined the Washington Republicans in a massive, I stood shoulder to
                shoulder with Jeff Sessions helping lead the fight. You know, folks here have talked
                about, how do you secure the <span class="keyword">borders</span>? Well, I've
                been leading the fight in the Senate to triple the Border Patrol, to put in place
                fencings and <span class="keyword">wall</span>s, to put in place a strong
                biometric exit/entry system... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech427">[source] </a> You know, everyone here talks about the need to take on Washington.
            The natural next question is who actually has done so. Who actually has stood up not
            just to Democrats, but to leaders in our own party? When millions of Americans rose up
            against Obamacare, I was proud to lead that fight. When millions of Americans rose up
            against <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, I was proud to lead that fight. When millions of Americans rose up
            against Planned Parenthood, I was proud to lead that fight. If people are promising
            they're going to take on Washington and cronyism, you need to look to who has been doing
            it. In my family, my dad fled oppression in Cuba to come to America. Freedom is personal
            for me, and I will always keep my word and fight for freedom.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech258">[source] </a> Well, he — he has attempted to muddy the waters, but I think that anyone
        who watched the battle that we had. You know, there was a time for choosing as Reagan put
        it. Where there was a battle over <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> and some chose, like Senator Rubio to stand with
        Barack Obama and Chuck Schumer and support a massive <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> plan. Others chose to stand
        with Jeff Sessions and Steve King and the American people and secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>. And let me
        mention, this issue is actually directly connected to what we've been talking about. <span class="trope">Because
        the front line with ISIS isn't just in Iraq and Syria, it's in Kennedy Airport and the Rio
        Grande. Border security is national security.</span> And, you know, one of the most troubling
        aspects of the Rubio-Schumer Gang of Eight Bill was that it gave President Obama blanket
        authority to admit refugees, including <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span> without mandating any background
        checks whatsoever. <span class="trope">Now we've seen what happened in San Bernardino. When you are letting
        people in, when the FBI can't vet them, it puts American citizens at risk.</span> 
         <span class="platform"> And I tell you,
        if I'm elected president, we will secure the border. We will triple the border patrol. We
        will build a wall that works and I'll get Donald Trump to pay for it.</span> [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech262">[source] </a> Look, I understand Marco wants to raise confusion, it is not accurate
        what he just said that I supported legalization. Indeed, I led the fight against his
        legalization and <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. And you know, there was one commentator that put it this way that,
        for Marco to suggest our record's the same is like suggesting "the fireman and the arsonist
        because they are both at the scene of the fire." He was fighting to grant <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> and not to
        secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>, I was fighting to secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>. And this also goes to trust,
        listening on to campaign trails. Candidates all the time make promises. You know, Marco
        said," he learned that the American people didn't trust the federal government."</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech286">[source] </a> What you do is you enforce the law. I've laid out a very, very detailed
        <span class="immigration">immigration</span> plan on my website, tedcruz.org. It's 11 pages of existing federal law and in
        particular the question of what to do with people who are here now? You enforce the law.
        That means you stop the Obama administration's policy of releasing criminal <span class="immigrant">illegal aliens</span>.
        Do you know how many <span class="immigrant">aliens</span> Bill Clinton deported? 12 million. Do you know how many <span class="immigrant">illegal
        aliens</span>, George W. Bush deported? 10 million.<span class="trope"> We can enforce the laws and if we secure the
        border, that solves the problem.</span>
         <span class="platform"> And as president I will solve this problem and secure the
        border.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech177">[source] </a>I want this bill to be voted down. I don't want <span class="immigration">immigration</span> reform to
            fail. I want <span class="immigration">immigration</span> reform to pass. I believe if this amendment were to pass, the
            chances of this bill passing into law would increase dramatically. I believe if the
            amendments I introduced were adopted, that the bill would pass. And my effort in
            introducing them was to find a solution that reflected common ground and that fixed the
            problem. If the proponents of this bill actually demonstrate a commitment not to
            politics, not to campaigning all the time, but to actually fixing this problem, to
            finding a middle ground. That would fix the problem, and also allow, for those 11
            million <span class="immigrant">people</span> who are here illegally, a legal status, with citizenship off the
            table.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech179">[source] </a>You know, the amendment you're talking about is one sentence — it's
            38 words. Anyone can go online at tedcruz.org and read exactly what it said. In those 38
            words, it said <span class="immigrant">anyone</span> here illegally is permanently ineligible for citizenship. It
            didn't say a word about legalization. I introduced...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech181">[source] </a>But — but Megyn, the bill was 1,000 pages. I introduced a series of
            amendments, each designed to fix problems in the bill. The fact that each amendment
            didn't fix every problem didn't mean that I supported the rest of the bill. <span class="trope">And I'll
            tell you who supported my amendment — Jeff Sessions, the strongest opponent of <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>
            in the United States Congress. And he did so because taking citizenship off the table
            was important, and it revealed the hypocrisy of the proponents of this bill, who were
            looking for votes.</span> Listen, we can solve <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. We just heard an argument back and
            forth that we can't solve <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. I have a detailed <span class="keyword">immigration</span> plan that is on my
            website, tedcruz.org. It was designed with Iowa's own Congressman Steve King and Jeff
            Sessions, and... [applause] ... we have the tools in federal law to do this now. We can
            build the <span class="keyword">fence</span>. <span class="trope">We can triple the <span class="keyword">border patrol</span>. We can end <span class="keyword">sanctuary cities</span> by cutting
            off... [bell rings] ... funding to them. We can end welfare for those here illegally.</span>
            And what is missing is the political will, because too many Democrats and, sadly, too
            many Republicans don't want to solve this problem. If I am elected president... [bell
            rings] ... we will secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech183">[source] </a>... and we will end the <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech187">[source] </a>You know, John Adams famously said, "facts are are stubborn things."
            The facts are are very, very simple. When that battle was waged, my friend Senator Rubio
            chose to stand with Barack Obama and Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer and support <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>.
            And I stood alongside Jeff Sessions and Steve King, and we led the fight against
            <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. And if you want to know who's telling the truth, you should look and ask people
            like Jeff Sessions and Steve King and Rush Limbaugh and Mark Levin, all of whom say, as
            Jeff Sessions said, responding to these false attacks just recently in Alabama — he
            said, "if it wasn't for Ted Cruz, the Gang of Eight Rubio/Schumer bill would have
            passed. But because Ted stood up and helped lead the effort, millions rose up to kill
            it. [bell rings] [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech193">[source] </a>You know, I like Marco. He's very charming. He's very smooth. But the
            facts are simple. When he ran for election in the state of Florida, he told the people
            of Florida, "if you elect me, I will lead the fight against <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>." When I ran in
            Texas, I told the people of Texas, "if you elect me, I will lead the fight against
            <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>." We both made the identical promises. But when we came to Washington, we made a
            different choice. Marco made the choice to go the direction of the major donors — to
            support <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> because he thought it was politically advantageous. [bell rings] I
            honored my commitments, and as president, I will honor every commitment that I make to
            the men and women of this country. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech103">[source] </a>So, in terms of a practical solution, I've laid out the most
                detailed plan for solving <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>. It's 11 pages, single-spaced, chapter
                and verse. It's on our website, tedcruz.org. <span class="platform">In short, we're going to do, we're
                going to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>. We're going to triple the <span class="keyword">border patrol</span>. We're going to
                increase — and actually, since Donald enjoyed that, I will simply say, I've got
                somebody in mind to build it. We're going to increase four-fold, the fixed-wing and
                rotary-wing aircraft, so that you have technology monitoring an attempted incursion
                to direct the boots on the ground where they're occurring. We're going to put in
                place a strong <span class="keyword">e-verify</span> system in the workplace, so you can't get a job without
                proving you are here legally. We'll put in place a biometric exit-entry system on
                visas, because 40 percent of <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> comes not over the <span class="keyword">border</span>
                illegally, but people <span class="keyword">coming on visas and overstaying</span>. We will end <span class="keyword">sanctuary cities</span>
                by cutting off taxpayer dollars to any jurisdiction that defies federal <span class="keyword">immigration
                law</span>. [applause] And we will end welfare benefits for <span class="immigrant">those here illegally</span>.</span>
                [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech105">[source] </a>What you do is, you enforce the law. You know, under the
                Constitution, the president has an obligation to, quote, "Take care that the laws be
                faithfully executed." Federal <span class="keyword">immigration law</span> provides, if someone is here illegally
                and is apprehended, they are to be deported. We saw just this past week the head of
                the <span class="keyword">border patrol</span> union testify before Congress that President Obama had given the
                order to the <span class="keyword">border patrol</span> to stand down, not to enforce the law. That is wrong. I
                will enforce the law, and for everyone who says, you can't possibly do that, I would
                note that in eight years, Bill Clinton deported 12 million people. In eight years,
                George W. Bush deported 10 million people. Enforcing the law — we can do it. What is
                missing is the political will. And when they were deporting the <span class="immigrant">people</span>, the <span class="keyword">border</span>
                wasn't secure, so they'd come right back. <span class="trope">Once you secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>, enforcing the
                law will solve this problem and that will benefit American workers.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech242">[source] </a>Well, thank you for that question. You know, there are three
                avenues of presidential authority to change the direction of this country. The first
                is executive power, the second is foreign policy, and the third is legislation.
                Executive power, as we all know, has been the preferred vehicle of President Obama,
                abusing his authority, abusing his constitutional authority. Now, the silver lining
                of that is everything done with executive power can be undone with executive power,
                so I have pledged on day one I will rescind every single illegal and
                unconstitutional executive action Barack Obama has done. That means on day one his
                efforts to restrict the Second Amendment go away with the strike of a pen. That
                means on day one his illegal executive <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> goes away with the strike of a pen.
                The reason I can end Common Core at the federal level is because Obama is abusing
                executive power using Race to the Top funds in the Department of Education to force
                it on the states. That's one avenue. The second avenue of change is foreign policy,
                and foreign policy can change the fastest. It's worth remembering that Iran released
                our hostages the day Reagan...[bell rings]...was sworn in. And, the third is
                legislation, and that can only be done with the people behind you, which is why the
                two big legislative initiatives I'm campaigning on are repealing Obamacare, and
                adopting a simple flat tax to abolish the IRS. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech259">[source] </a>Well, Josh, as you noted, this is a problem that, for me, I
                understand first-hand. My older sister, Myriam, who was my half- sister, struggled
                her whole life with drug and alcohol addiction. My father and her mom divorced when
                she was a little girl and she was angry her whole life, and she ended up marrying a
                man who had been in and out of jail. She then became a single mom and she herself
                went to jail several times and she ended up spending some time in a crack house. I
                still remember my father and me driving up to get Myriam out of that crack house to
                try to convince her she needed to be a mom to — to my nephew Joey. She wasn't
                willing to listen. She was not willing to change the path she was on. She was angry.
                I was — had just gotten my first job coming out of law school. I took a $20,000 loan
                on a credit card to put my nephew, Joey, in Valley Forge Military Academy — he was
                in sixth grade at the time, to pay his way through that. And about five, six years
                ago, Miriam died of an overdose. It was — the coroner ruled it accidental. We don't
                know. She went to one night, had taken too many pills, and Joey walked in and found
                her dead. This is an absolute epidemic. We need leadership to solve it. Solving it
                has to occur at the state and local level with programs like A.A., and counseling,
                and churches and charities. But it also has to be securing the <span class="keyword">borders</span>, because you
                have got Mexican cartels that are smuggling vast amounts of heroin into this
                country. We know how to secure the <span class="keyword">borders</span>. What is missing is the political will to
                do it. And as president, I will secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>, we will end this deluge of drugs
                that is flowing over our southern <span class="keyword">border</span> and that is killing Americans across this
                country.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech164">[source] </a>Well, you know, your question highlights a sharp difference on
                <span class="immigration">immigration</span> on this
            stage. You know, in a Republican primary, everyone talks tough on <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. Everyone is against
                <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> in a Republican primary. But as voters, we've been burned
            over and over again by people that give us a great campaign speech and they don't walk
            the walk. There are sharp differences on <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. If
            you look at the folks on this stage, when Harry Reid and Chuck Schumer and establishment
            Republicans were leading the fight to pass a massive <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> plan, I stood with Jeff Sessions and Steve King and the American
            people and led the fight to defeat that <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> plan.
            [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech168">[source] </a>That moment was what Reagan would call "a time for choosing." When it
            comes to deciding which side of the line you're on, the Rubio-Schumer <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> plan...[booing]...apparently supported by the donor
            class, which is why Washington supported it. The Rubio-Schumer <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> plan passed the Senate, and it was on the verge of passing the
            House. House leadership intended to take it up and pass it with the Democrats overruling
            most of the Republicans. And the question for anyone on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is, where were you in
            that fight? Where did you stand? You are right. There is a difference between Senator
            Rubio and me on this question. [crosstalk]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech174">[source] </a>You know, the lines are very, very clear. Marco right now supports
            citizenship for 12 million <span class="immigrant">people</span>
            here illegally. I oppose citizenship. Marco stood on the debate stage and said that. But
            I would note not only that — Marco has a long record when it comes to <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. <span class="trope">In the state of Florida, as speaker of the house, he supported
                in-state tuition for <span class="immigrant">illegal
                    immigrants</span>.</span> In addition to that, Marco went on Univision in
            Spanish and said he would not rescind President Obama's illegal executive <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> on his first day in office. I have promised to
            rescind every single illegal executive action, including that one. [applause and booing]
            And on the question... [crosstalk]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech182">[source] </a>... who is telling the truth... [crosstalk] If you want to assess who
            is telling the truth...[applause]...then you should look to Jeff Sessions, who said,
            without Ted Cruz the Rubio-Schumer <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> bill would
            have passed, and Ted was responsible. You should look to Rush Limbaugh and Mark Levin,
            that said... [crosstalk]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech354">[source] </a>South Carolina, you have a critical choice to make. Our country
                literally hangs in the balance. Do you want another Washington deal maker who will
                do business as usual, cut deals with the Democrats, grow government, grow debt and
                give up our fundamental liberties? Or do you want a conservative, a proven
                conservative that will stand and fight with you each and every day? Listen,
                repealing Obamacare is not going to be easy. Passing a simple flat tax that
                abolishes the I.R.S. is not going to be easy, but if we stand with the American
                people, we can do it. And today, we saw just how great the stakes are. Two branches
                of government hang in the balance. Not just the presidency but the Supreme Court. If
                we get this wrong, if we nominate the wrong candidates, the Second Amendment, life,
                marriage, religious liberty — every one of those hangs in the balance. My little
                girls are here. I don't want to look my daughters in the eyes and say, "We lost
                their liberties." Who do you know will defend the Constitution and Bill of Rights?
                And as a commander in chief, who do you know will stand up to our enemies as the
                clam, steady, deliberate, strength to defeat our enemies, to secure our <span class="keyword">borders</span> and to keep America safe.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech72">[source] </a> Chris, absolutely yes. And not only will I support
            it...[applause]...I have authored Kate's law in the United States Senate and filed that
            legislation. I tried to get the Senate to vote to pass Kate's law on the floor of the
            Senate just one week ago, and the leader of our own party blocked a vote on Kate's law.
            You know, there was reference made to our leaders being stupid. It's not a question of
            stupidity. It's that they don't want to enforce the <span class="immigration">immigration laws</span>. That there are far too many
            in the Washington cartel that support <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>.
            President Obama has talked about fundamentally transforming this country. There's 7
            billion people across the face of the globe, many of whom want to come to this country.
            If they come legally, great. But if they come illegally and they get <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, that is how we fundamentally change this country,
            and it really is striking. A majority of the candidates on this stage have supported
                <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. I have never supported <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, and I led the fight against Chuck Schumer's gang
            of eight <span class="keyword">amnesty legislation</span> in the Senate.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech280">[source] </a> Well, I am blessed to receive a word from God every day in receiving the scriptures and reading the scriptures. And God speaks through the Bible. [applause]

I'm the son of a pastor and evangelist and I've described many times how my father, when I was a child, was an alcoholic. He wasn't a Christian. And my father left my mother and left me when I was just three years old.

And someone invited him to Clay Road Baptist Church. And he gave his heart to Jesus and it turned him around. And he got on a plane and he flew back to my mother and me. [applause]

I would also note that the scripture tells us, "you shall know them by their fruit." We see lots of "campaign conservatives." But if we're going to win in 2016, we need a consistent conservative, someone who has been a fiscal conservative, a social conservative, a national security conservative.

There are real differences among the candidates on issues like <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, like Obamacare, like religious liberty, like life and marriage. And I have been proud to fight and stand for religious liberty, to stand against Planned Parenthood, to defend life for my entire career.

And I will be proud to continue to do so as president of the United States.</p>
      <h2>DICKERSON</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech54">[source] </a> Senator, let me just -- let's add to whatever you've got to say.
            <span class="immigrant">Refugees</span>. You've been a little vague on what you would do about the <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span>.
            What's your view on them now? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech62">[source] </a> Secretary Clinton, let me ask you a question from twitter which has
            come in and this is a question on this issue of <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. The question is, with the U.S.
            preparing to absorb <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span>, how do you propose we screen those coming in to
            keep citizens safe? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech159">[source] </a>Welcome back. We'll begin the second half of the debate with one
            of the hottest issues in the Republican campaign, <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. But before I turn it back to Major
            Garrett and Kim Strassel, I have one question for Mr. Trump. Mr. Trump, in the
            Republican National Committee's Spanish-language response to the State of the Union,
            Congressman Diaz-Balart said, quote, "It's essential that we find a legislative
            solution," talking about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, "to offer a permanent and humane solution to <span class="immigrant">those who live in the
                shadows</span>. What does that mean to you, "a humane solution to <span class="immigrant">those who live in the
                shadows</span>"?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech219">[source] </a>We're back now from Greenville, South Carolina, with the
            candidates for the Republican presidential nomination. Mr. Trump, I have a question for
            you. Presidents have to, on the one hand, be firm, but also be flexible. You have been
            flexible and changed your opinion on a number of things, from abortion to Hillary
            Clinton. But you have said, rightly, that it's just like Ronald Reagan, who changed his
            mind on things. But at the same time, you're criticizing Senator Cruz for what you say
            is a change on <span class="immigration">immigration</span>.
            He disputes that, of course. So, why is your change of opinion make you like Reagan, and
            when he changes his opinion, it's a huge character flaw? [laughter]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech289">[source] </a>Senator, I wanted to ask you, just going back to
                    <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, in the
                last debate, you listed your series of accomplishments in the Senate. One thing you
                left off was — was <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>.
                Is it the case that in your list of accomplishments you can't mention that?</p>
      <h2>FIORINA</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech320">[source] </a> First let me say, We have just spent a good bit of time
            discussing, as Republicans, how to solve this problem. I would ask your audience at home
            to ask a very basic question. Why have Democrats not solved this problem? President
            Obama campaigned in 2007 and 2008 on solving the <span class="keyword">immigration problem</span>. He entered
            Washington with majorities in the House and the Senate. He could have chosen to do
            anything to solve this pro — this problem. Instead, he chose to do nothing. Why? because
            the Democrats don't want this issue solved. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech322">[source] </a> They want it to be an issue that they can use. As to <span class="keyword">birthright
            citizenship</span>... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech324">[source] </a> ...the truth is, you can't just wave your hands and say "the 14th
            Amendment is gonna go away." It will take an extremely arduous vote in Congress,
            followed by two-thirds of the states, and if that doesn't work to amend the
            Constitution, then it is a long, arduous process in court. And meanwhile, what will
            continue to go on is what has gone on for 25 years. With all due respect, Mr. Trump,
            we've been talking about <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> for 25 years. San Francisco has been a
            sanctuary city since 1989. There are 300 of them. And meanwhile, what has happened?
            Nothing. The <span class="keyword">border</span> remains insecure. The legal
            <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> remains broken. Look, we know what it takes to secure a <span class="keyword">border</span>. We've heard a lot of great ideas here. Money,
            manpower, technology... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1059">[source] </a> ...the truth is, you can't just wave your hands and say "the
                14th Amendment is gonna go away." It will take an extremely arduous vote in
                Congress, followed by two-thirds of the states, and if that doesn't work to amend
                the Constitution, then it is a long, arduous process in court. And meanwhile, what
                will continue to go on is what has gone on for 25 years. With all due respect, Mr.
                Trump, we've been talking about illegal immigration for 25 years. San Francisco has
                been a sanctuary city since 1989. There are 300 of them. And meanwhile, what has
                happened? Nothing. The <span class="keyword">border</span> remains insecure. The
                legal immigration system remains broken. Look, we know what it takes to secure a
                    <span class="keyword">border</span>. We've heard a lot of great ideas here.
                Money, manpower, technology... </p>
      <h2>GARRETT</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech161">[source] </a>Senator Rubio... [applause] For the purposes of the lines — lines
            you would draw legislatively as a president on <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, define <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech185">[source] </a>You have said <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>, quote, "broke the law, but it's not a felony,"
            still quoting you, "it's an act of love, it's an act of commitment to your family." Mr.
            Trump has, as you are well aware, denounced that statement over and over. Do you still
            believe it? What does that mean to you? And how does that inform your approach to
                <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech206">[source] </a>... We will leave the moon metaphors to be adjudicated later, I
            assure you. Governor Kasich, you said earlier this week in South Carolina, the concept,
            the idea of deporting 11 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented workers</span> in this country is nuts. Why is it you are so
            opposed to that idea? Senator Cruz has said it's a simple application of existing law.
            The application of that is not inhumane, it is just. Why do you disagree?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech208">[source] </a>... What are you for on <span class="immigration">immigration</span>?</p>
      <h2>HAM</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech241">[source] </a>Thanks, David. Senator Cruz, on the campaign trail you've promised
                voters a lot, in fact if you're elected president you'd say you end Common Core
                immediately, abolish the IRS, and do away with <span class="keyword">sanctuary cities</span>. You've also been a
                persistent critic of President Obama's executive overreach, going it alone, not
                working with Congress. How do you intend to implement this aggressive agenda within
                your Constitutional authority, especially given that it would require working with
                Congress and Washington players with whom you're happy to say you have a strained
                relationship?</p>
      <h2>HARWOOD</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech238">[source] </a> Welcome back to the Republican presidential debate on CNBC, live
            from Boulder, Colorado at the University of Colorado. Senator Huckabee, I mean — excuse
            me — Senator Rubio, Wired magazine recently carried the headline, "Marco Rubio wants to
            be the tech industry's savior." It noted your support for dramatically increasing 
           <span class="keyword">immigration visas</span> called H1B, which are designed for workers with the special skills
            that Silicon Valley wants. But your Senate colleague, Jeff Sessions of Alabama, says in
            reality, the tech industry uses this program to undercut hiring and wages for highly
            qualified Americans. Why is he wrong?</p>
      <h2>HUCKABEE</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech266">[source] </a> The military is not a social experiment. The purpose of the
            military is kill people and break things. [applause] It's not to transform the culture
            by trying out some ideas that some people think would make us a different country and
            more diverse. The purpose is to protect America. I'm not sure how paying for transgender
            surgery for soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines makes our country safer. We've reduced
            the military by 25 percent... [applause] ... under President Obama. The disaster is that
            we've forgotten why we have a military. The purpose of it is to make sure that we
            protect every American, wherever that American is, and if an American is calling out for
            help, whether it's in Benghazi or at the <span class="keyword">border</span>, then
            we ought to be able to answer it. We've not done that because we've decimated our
            military. We're flying B-52s. The most recent one that was put in service was November
            of 1962. A lot of the B-52s we're flying, we've only got 44 that are in service combat
            ready, and the fact is, most of them are older than me. And that's pretty scary.
            [laughter and applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech266">[source] </a> The military is not a social experiment. The purpose of the military is kill people and break things. [applause]

It's not to transform the culture by trying out some ideas that some people think would make us a different country and more diverse. The purpose is to protect America. I'm not sure how paying for transgender surgery for soldiers, sailors, airmen, marines makes our country safer.

We've reduced the military by 25 percent... [applause] ... under President Obama. The disaster is that we've forgotten why we have a military. The purpose of it is to make sure that we protect every American, wherever that American is, and if an American is calling out for help, whether it's in Benghazi or at the <span class="keyword">border</span>, then we ought to be able to answer it.

We've not done that because we've decimated our military. We're flying B-52s. The most recent one that was put in service was November of 1962. A lot of the B-52s we're flying, we've only got 44 that are in service combat ready, and the fact is, most of them are older than me. And that's pretty scary.

[laughter and applause]

</p>
      <h2>KASICH</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech66">[source] </a> But the point is that we all have solutions. Mr. Trump is touching
            a nerve because people want the <span class="keyword">wall</span> to be built. They
            want to see an end to <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span>. They want to see it, and we all do. But we all have
            different ways of getting there. And you're going to hear from all of us tonight about
            what our ideas are. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech126">[source] </a>I — I've been for pausing on admitting the <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span>. And the reasons
            why I've done is I don't believe we have a good process of being able to vet them. But
            you know, we don't want to put everybody in the same category. And I'll go back to
            something that had been mentioned just a few minutes ago. <span class="trope">If we're going to have a coalition, we're going
                to have to have a coalition not just of people in the western part of the world, our
                European allies, but we need the Saudis, we need the Egyptians, we need the
                Jordanians, we need the Gulf states. We need Jordan. We need all of them to be part
                of exactly what the first George Bush put together in the first Gulf War. [bell
                rings] It was a coalition made up of Arabs and Americans and westerners and we're
                going to need it again. And if we try to put everybody in the same — call everybody
                the same thing, we can't do it.</span> And that's just not acceptable. But I think
            a pause on <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span>
            has been exactly right for all the governors that have called for it, and also, of
            course, for me as the governor of Ohio.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech101">[source] </a>Well, you know, David, I — I've just spent a lot of time here
                in this state, as I mentioned earlier, and we have to have practical solutions, just
                like we were just talking about a few minutes ago on North Korea. Look, the
                situation is, we need to finish the <span class="keyword">border</span>. It has to be completed. Just like we
                lock our doors at night, the country has to be able to lock its doors. And we can
                have a <span class="immigrant">guest worker</span> program, where people can come in and out in an orderly way. <span class="trope">And
                then for the 11.5 million that are here, if they have not committed a crime since
                they've been here, I believe they ought to pay some back taxes, pay a fine, never
                get on the <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>, but get legalization.</span> 
         <span class="trope">It is not — I couldn't even
                imagine how we would even begin to think about taking a mom or a dad out of a house
                when they have not committed a crime since they've been here, leaving their children
                in the house. I mean, that is not, in my opinion, the kind of values that we believe
                in.</span> And secondly, I think at the end of the day, that Americans would support a plan
                like this. I think Congress would pass a plan to finish the <span class="keyword">border</span>, <span class="immigrant">guest worker</span>,
                pay a fine, a path to legalization, and not citizenship. And we've got to get this
                done. And I will tell you this, within the first 100 days that I am president, I
                will put that proposal to the Congress. And I will tell you, as a former
                Congressman, and an executive, in Ohio, I can promise you that I believe you'll get
                the votes to pass that, and we can move on with that issue and protect our <span class="keyword">border</span>.
                That's what I think.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech246">[source] </a>Well, right now the deals — there's no leadership. I mean, a
                lot of the things that we're talking about here tonight, on the <span class="keyword">border</span>, and so many
                of the things. What we should be doing on foreign policy, you know what the problem
                is, Mary Katharine? There's not a leader that gets somebody to rise up. You have to
                have a leader that can inspire, and actually some of what Donald was saying is true.
                Look, do you know how hard it was...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech250">[source] </a>Mary Katherine, let me just say this to you. [applause] You
                must have an agenda that you are ready to move on in the first 100 days. Jeb is
                right. If you delay and you wait, the Washington operators will take you down. I can
                tell you this, in the first 100 days, I will have legislation to freeze federal
                regulations, have them reviewed by the vice president, reduce state taxes on
                individuals, reduce taxes on corporations, have a fiscal plan to balance the budget,
                get the <span class="keyword">border</span> protected and begin to fix Social Security in the first 100 days. So,
                anybody who is here tonight, if I get elected president, head out tomorrow and buy a
                seat belt, because there's going to be so much happening in the first 100 days, it's
                going to make your head spin. We're going to move America forward. I promise you.
                We're going to move us forward. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech94">[source] </a>Oh, well, listen, I think being in Iraq, look, we thought there
                were weapons of mass destruction. Colin Powell, who is one of the most distinguished
                generals in modern time, said there were weapons there. [applause] But, but, the
                fact is we got ourselves in the middle of a civil war. The Sunni, the Shia and the
                Kurds, never gotten along. In fact, that country was drawn — the <span class="keyword">borders</span> of that country were drawn after World War I by
                Westerners that didn't understand what was happening there. The tragedy of it is
                that we're still embroiled. And, frankly, if there weren't weapons of mass
                destruction, we should never have gone. I don't believe the United States should
                involve itself in civil wars. Civil wars are not in our direct interest, and if you
                — and look, I served on a defense committee for 18 years and was called into the
                Pentagon after 9/11 by Secretary Rumsfeld to deal with some of the most serious
                problems that we faced. The fact is, is that we should go to war when it is our
                direct interest. We should not be policemen of the world, but when we go, we mean
                business. We'll do our job. We'll tell our soldiers, our people in the service, take
                care of your job and then come home once we've accomplished our goals. That's what
                we need to do.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech209">[source] </a>... [off mike] [inaudible] First of all, I'm for sealing the
                <span class="keyword">border</span>, O.K.? And then I'm for a <span class="immigrant">guest worker</span> program. <span class="immigrant">People</span> can come in, work and go back home.
            We haven't closed the <span class="keyword">border</span> because special interests,
            I believe, blocked it. Then, we have 11 and a half million <span class="immigrant">people</span> here. If they have not committed a crime since
            they've been here, make them pay a fine and some back taxes, and give them a path to
            legalization, never to citizenship. It is not going to happen that we're going to run
            around and try to drag 11 and a half million people out of their homes. <span class="platform">I'll tell you this. Within the first hundred
                days, I will send a plan like this to the Congress of the United States, and if I'm
                president, I'll bet you dollar to doughnuts right now, it will pass.</span>
            [bell rings] That is a reasonable proposal that the people of this country, in my
            judgment, will support, and so will the bulk of the Congress of the United States.
            [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech345">[source] </a>Well, I want to thank the people of South Carolina. You've been
                fantastic. And look, what I want you to know is I'm going to send a lot of power,
                money and influence back to where we all live. But as I've traveled around South
                Carolina, I've noticed something. You know, it's that people have a sense that
                you're not going to wait on a president. You know, when I was a kid, we didn't wait
                on presidents to come to that little blue-collar town and fix things. You know, the
                Lord made all of us special. The Lord wants us to be connected. I believe we're part
                of a very big mosaic. And I'll send the power back. And whoever gets elected
                president here, hopefully will take care of the issue of jobs and wages and Social
                Security and the <span class="keyword">border</span>. But the spirit of the
                America rests in all of us. It's in our guts. It's taking care of our children. It's
                taking care of the lady next door who just lost her husband. It's fixing the schools
                where we live and telling kids to stay off drugs. You see, I think what the Lord
                wants is for to us engage, and in America, the spirit of America doesn't come from
                the top down. The spirit of America rests in us. And I want to call on everyone in
                America to double down and realize that you were made special to heal this country
                and lift it for everyone. Thank you all very much. And I hope I can have your vote
                in South Carolina. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech66">[source] </a> But the point is that we all have solutions. Mr. Trump is touching
            a nerve because people want the <span class="keyword">wall</span> to be built. They want to see an end to
                <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span>. They want to see it, and we all do. But we all have
            different ways of getting there. And you're going to hear from all of us tonight about
            what our ideas are. </p>
      <h2>KELLY</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech145">[source] </a>All right. We're going to move on. Because coming up, <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, and something you've
            never seen before. Stay tuned, right after this break. [commercial break]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech146">[source] </a>Welcome back everyone. Live, in Des Moines, Iowa. Now, we move onto
            the topic of <span class="immigration">immigration</span>.
            Senator Rubio, we'll start with you. When you ran for Senate in 2010, you made clear
            that you opposed legalization and citizenship for <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>. You promised repeatedly
            that you would oppose it as a U.S. Senator as well. Here are just a few examples. Watch.
            [begin video clip]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech150">[source] </a>Within two years of getting elected you were co-sponsoring
            legislation to create a <span class="keyword">path to
                citizenship</span>, in your words, amnesty. Haven't you already proven that you
            cannot be trusted on this issue?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech156">[source] </a>... You said earned <span class="keyword">path to
                citizenship</span> is basically code for <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. You...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech158">[source] </a>... supported earned <span class="keyword">path to
                citizenship</span>...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech160">[source] </a>Governor Bush, do you agree Senator Rubio has not reversed himself
            on his <span class="immigration">immigration</span> promise?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech176">[source] </a>OK. Let's move on. Senator Cruz, when Senator Rubio proposed that
            bill creating a <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span>, you proposed an amendment. It would have allowed
            for legalization but not citizenship. Yes, it would. Pressed last month on why you
            supported legalization, you claimed that you didn't. Right? Like you just did. Saw that.
            [laughter] You argued that this was just a poison pill amendment, basically it's
            something designed to kill the bill and not actually get it through. But that is not,
            however, how it sounded at the time. Watch. [begin video clip]</p>
      <h2>LOPEZ</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech287">[source] </a> Gracias, Anderson. Senator Sanders, in 2013, you voted for <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>. But in 2007, when Democrats
            controlled Congress and the Bush White House was onboard, you voted against it. Why
            should Latino voters trust you now when you left them at the altar at the moment when
            reform was very close? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech292">[source] </a> Secretary Clinton — Secretary Clinton, Governor O'Malley wants to
            open up Obamacare to millions of <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> and their
            children, including almost 90,000 people right here in Nevada. Do you? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech298">[source] </a> Senator Webb, do you support the <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> getting
            Obamacare? </p>
      <h2>MCELVEEN</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech260">[source] </a>And Governor Christie, you have talked a lot about this issue
                here in New Hampshire. [applause] State reforms, criminal justice reforms, access to
                treatment. To Senator Cruz's point, let's take it a step further. Would you be
                willing to engage in <span class="keyword">cross-border</span> enforcement into Mexico, a place where law
                enforcement in New Hampshire has traced at lot of this supply back to. Would you
                engage in <span class="keyword">cross-border</span> enforcement without the cooperation without the Mexican
                government?</p>
      <h2>MUIR</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech86">[source] </a> Martha, we're going to turn now to <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> coming to America. And on the subject of
                <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>, more than half of all
            Americans now say they oppose taking in <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> from Syria and across the Middle East. Secretary Clinton, you
            have said that it would undermine who we are as Americans, shutting our doors. But New
            Hampshire's governor, where we are right here tonight, a democrat and a supporter of
            yours, is among more than 30 governors who are now concerned. Governor Maggie Hassan
            says, "we should halt acceptance of <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span> until U.S. authorities can assure the vetting process,
            halt <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span>." Is
            she wrong? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech100">[source] </a>Martha, we're going to turn to <span class="immigration">immigration</span> now. And I want to
                bring in Governor Kasich because you told us in an ABC interview, Governor, quote,
                "It is completely ridiculous to think we are going to go into neighborhoods, grab
                people out of their homes and ship people back to Mexico." Adding, quote, "That's
                not where the party is. The party is not for departing 11.5 million people." But Mr.
                Trump and Senator Cruz, who have made deportation central to their campaigns, top
                the national polls. So, my question for you, are you not where the voters
                are?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech102">[source] </a>Governor Kasich, thank you. [applause] I want to bring this next
                to Senator Cruz. You heard what the governor said. He said, "We need practical
                solutions." And you've said, "I don't intend to send jack boots to knock on doors.
                That's not how we enforce the law for any crime." So, what is your plan? How will
                you deport 11.5 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented people</span>? And be specific. How would you do
                it?</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech106">[source] </a>Senator Cruz, thank you. I want to bring in Senator Rubio. This
                question is about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, it is also about leadership. You're aware of the
                criticism from many candidates on this stage tonight that you co-authored the
                so-called Gang of Eight bill that would have created a <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span> for
                <span class="immigrant">people</span> here illegally. Governor Christie has said of you, as soon as you felt the
                heat, you turned tail and run. Governor Bush has said, "I don't think we need people
                cutting and running anymore." Did you fight for your own legislation, Senator, or
                did you run from it?</p>
      <h2>O'MALLEY</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech295">[source] </a> Juan Carlos, I think what you've heard up here is some of the
            old thinking on <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, and
            that's why it's gridlocked. <span class="trope">We need
                to understand that our country is stronger in every generation by the arrival of new
                    <span class="immigrant">American
                    immigrants</span>.</span> That is why I have put out a policy for
            comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, that is
            why I would go further than President Obama has on DACA, and DAPA. <span class="trope">I mean, we are a nation of <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, we are made stronger
                by <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>
         </span>.
                <span class="trope">Do you think for a second that
                simply because somebody's standing in a broken que on naturalization they're not
                going to go to the hospital, and that care isn't going to fall on to our insurance
                rates?</span>
            <span class="trope">I am for a generous, compassionate
                America that says we're all in this together.</span> we need </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech297">[source] </a> . .. <span class="keyword">
                comprehensiveimmigration reform</span>. It'll make wages go up in America $250
            for every year. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech318">[source] </a> Tried to mischaracterize it as free tuition for <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>. But, we
            took our case to the people when it was petitioned to referendum, and we won with 58
            percent of the vote. The more our children learn, the more they will earn, and that's
            true of children who have yet to be naturalized. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech439">[source] </a> Anderson, thank you.

I am very, very grateful to have been able to be on this stage with this distinguished group of candidates tonight. And what you heard tonight, Anderson, was a very, very — and all of you watching at home — was a very, very different debate than from the sort of debate you heard from the two presidential Republican debates. [applause]

On this stage — on this stage, you didn't hear anyone denigrate women, you didn't hear anyone make racist comments about <span class="immigrant">new American immigrants</span>, you didn't hear anyone speak ill of another American because of their religious belief.

What you heard instead on this stage tonight was an honest search for the answers that will move our country forward, to move us to a 100 percent clean electric energy grid by 2050, to take the actions that we have always taken as Americans so that we can actually attack injustice in our country, employ more of our people, rebuild our cities and towns, educate our children at higher and better levels, and include more of our people in the economic, social, and political life of our country.

I truly believe that we are standing on the threshold of a new era of American progress. Unless you've become discouraged about our gridlock in Congress, talk to our young people under 30, because you'll never find among them people that want to bash <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> or people that want to deny rights to gay couples. [applause]

That tells me we are moving to a more connected, generous, and compassionate place, and we need to speak to the goodness within our country. [applause]

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech57">[source] </a> John, I was the first person on this stage to say that we should
            accept the 65,000 <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugees</span> that were fleeing the sort of murder of ISIL, and I
            believe that that needs to be done with proper screening. But accommodating 65,000
            <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> in our country today, people of 320 million, is akin to making room for 6.5
            more people in a baseball stadium with 32,000. There are other ways to lead and to be a
            moral leader in this world, rather than at the opposite end of a drone strike. But I
            would want to agree with something that Senator Sanders says. The nature of warfare has
            changed. This is not a conflict where we send in the third divisions of Marines. This is
            a new era of conflict where traditional ways of huge standing armies are not as -- serve
            our purposes as well as special ops, better intelligence and being more proactive. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech92">[source] </a> Well, Mr. Cooney, we've actually been focusing on <span class="keyword">border security</span> to
            the exclusion of talking about <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>. In fact, if more border
            security and these -- and more and more deportations were going to bring our Republican
            brothers and sisters to the table, it would have happened long ago. The fact of the
            matter is -- and let's say it in our debate, because you'll never hear this from that
            <span class="keyword">immigration-bashing</span> carnival barker, Donald Trump, the truth of the matter is...
            [applause] The truth of the matter is, <span class="immigration">net immigration</span> from Mexico last year was zero.
            Fact check me. Go ahead. Check it out. <span class="trope">But the truth of the matter is, if we want wages
            to go up, we've got to get 11 million of our neighbors out of off the book shadow
            economy, and into the full light of an American economy. That's what our parents and
            grandparents always did. That's what we need to do as a nation.</span> 
         <span class="trope">Yes, we must protect our
            borders. But there is no substitute for having <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span> with a
            pathway to citizenship for 11 million people, many of whom have known no other country
            but the United States of America. Our symbol is the Statue of Liberty. It is not a
            barbed wire fence.</span> 
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech91">[source] </a> No, what I would say is this is look, I was the first of the three
            of us to call for America to accept the 65,000 <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> we were asked to accept. And if this humanitarian crisis
            increases, we should accept more. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech93">[source] </a> David, there are wider vulnerabilities than when it comes to
                <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. I met recently with
            some members of the Chaldean Christian communities and the wait times are a year, 18
            months, 24 months. There is a pretty excruciating process that <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> go through. We need to invest more in terms of
            the other sort of visas and the other sort of waivers. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech94">[source] </a>
            <span class="anecdote">What these Chaldean families told
                me was that their families in Syria, when ISIS moves into their town, they actually
                paint a red cross across the door and mark their homes for demolition, and that
                tells the family you'd better get out now. The sort of genocide and brutality that
                the victims are suffering, these are not the perpetrators. We need to be the nation
                whose enduring symbol is the Statue of Liberty, and we need to act like the great
                country we are, according to our values.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech314">[source] </a>Well, they can have
            their anger and they can have their fear, but anger and fear never built America. <span class="platform">We build our country by adopting wage and
                labor policies, including <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration
                    reform</span> with a pathway of citizenship for all.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-01-17.xhtml#speech11">[source] </a> Thank you. First of all, I would lay out an agenda to make wages go
            up again for all Americans, rather than down. Equal pay for equal work, making it easier
            rather than harder for people to join labor unions and bargain collectively for better
            wages;<span class="platform"> getting 11 million of our neighbors out of the underground shadow economy by
            passing <span class="immigrant">comprehensive immigration reform</span>, </span>raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour,
            however we can, wherever we can. Secondly, I believe the greatest business opportunity
            to come to the United States of America in 100 years is climate change. And I put
            forward a plan to move us to a 100 percent clean electric energy grid by 2050 and create
            5 million jobs along the way. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-01-17.xhtml#speech111">[source] </a> Yes, but senator you never came to campaign for Vincent Sheheen when
            he was running for governor. In fact, neither of you came to campaign for Vincent
            Sheheen when he was running for governor. [applause] We can talk all we want about
            wanting to build a stronger Democratic party, but Lester, the question you answered,
            it's no laughing matter. The most recurring question I get when I stand on the chair all
            across Iowa and talk with my neighbors is, how are you going to heal the divisions and
            the wounds in our country? This is the biggest challenge we face as a people. All my
            life, I brought people together over deep divides and very old wounds, and that's what
            we need now in a new leader. We cannot keep talking past each other, declaring all
            Republicans are our enemies or the war is all about being against millionaires or
            billionaires, or it's all against American Muslims, all against <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. Look, as
            Frederick Douglas said, we are one, our cause is one, and we must help each other if we
            are going to succeed. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-01-17.xhtml#speech289">[source] </a> There are so many issues that we haven't been able to discuss here.
            We have not fully discussed <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, and the deplorable number of <span class="immigrant">immigrant
            detention camps</span> that our nation's now maintaining. We haven't discussed the shameful
            treatment that the people of Puerto Rico, our fellow Americans, are getting treated with
            by these hedge funds that are working them over. [applause] <span class="trope">We haven't discussed the
            fact that in our hemisphere we have the danger of nation-state failures because of drug
            traffickers; and Honduras, and Guatemala and El Salvador.</span> I guess the bottom line is
            this, look we are a great people the way we act at home and abroad based on the beliefs
            that unite us. Our belief in the dignity of every person, our belief in our own common
            good. There is now challenge that is too great for us to overcome provided we bring
            forward in these divided times, new leadership that can heal our divides here at home
            and bring our principles into alignment abroad. We're on the threshold of a new era of
            American progress and I believe we have only need to join forces together and cross that
            threshold into a new era of American prosperity. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-1-25.xhtml#speech160">[source] </a> Sure. Yes. The - let me talk a little bit about our economy. Prior
            to President Obama's good work - and he's done great work. He saved us from a second
            Great Depression, from the recklessness and the greed on Wall Street. Our nation's
            creating jobs again and we're the only species on the planet without full employment, so
            jobs are important, right? Without jobs, nothing works very well. But here's another
            thing that doesn't work very well in America, unless it's going in the right direction,
            and that is wages. For the first time this side of World War II, 70 percent of us are
            earning the same or less than we did 12 years ago. So as I look at this, I believe that
            we need to first and foremost remember that our economy is not money. It is people. It
            is all of our people. And we need to restore common sense wage and labor policies that
            make wages rise again. Things we used to do, Democrats and Republicans together all the
            time, like keeping the minimum wage above the poverty line, paying overtime pay for
            overtime work. How about this, the long deferred promise of equal pay for equal work for
            men and women? [applause] Making it easier for people to join labor unions instead of
            harder. <span class="platform">And then... [applause] ...And here's another one to make wages go up instead of
            being a drag on wages, let's get 11 million of <span class="immigrant">our neighbors</span> out of the underground
            shadow economy by passing <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>... [applause] ...with a
            pathway to citizenship for all.</span> 
      </p>
      <h2>OBRADOVICH</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech96">[source] </a> Senator Sanders, you've actually talked about <span class="immigrant">immigration</span> as being
            a wage issue in the United States. And I want to actually go directly to the wage issue
            now. You called for raising the minimum wage to $15 an hour everywhere in the country.
            But the President's former chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, Alan Krueger, has
            said a national increase of $15 could lead to undesirable and unintended consequences of
            job loss. What level of job loss would you consider unacceptable? </p>
      <h2>PAUL</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech50">[source] </a> You know, I think Marco gets it completely wrong. We are not any safer
        through the bulk collection of all Americans' records. In fact, I think we're less safe. We
        get so distracted by all of the information, we're not spending enough time getting specific
        immigration — specific information on terrorists. <span class="trope">The other thing is, is the one thing that
        might have stopped San Bernardino, that might have stopped 9/11 would have been stricter
        controls on those who came here</span>. And Marco has opposed at every point increased security —
        <span class="keyword">border</span> security for those who come to our country. On his Gang of Eight bill, he would have
        liberalized <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, but he did not — and he steadfastly opposed any new border security
        requirements for <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> or <span class="immigrant">students</span>. Last week, I introduced another bill saying we need
        more security, we need more scrutiny. Once again, Marco opposed this. So Marco can't have it
        both ways. He thinks he wants to be this, "Oh, I'm great and strong on national defense."
        But he's the weakest of all the candidates on <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. <span class="trope">He is the one for an open border
        that is leaving us defenseless. If we want to defend the country, we have to defend against
        who's coming in, and Marco is — has more of an allegiance to Chuck Schumer and to the
        liberals than he does to conservative policy</span>. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech56">[source] </a> Marco still misunderstands the <span class="immigration">immigration</span> issue. What I put forward was
        an amendment that would have temporarily halted <span class="immigration">immigration</span> from high-risk terrorist
        countries, but would have started it up, but I wanted them to go through Global Entry, which
        is a program where we do background checks. <span class="trope">The thing is, is that every terrorist attack
        we've had since 9/11 has been <span class="immigration">legal immigration</span>. Marco wants to expand that. I want more
        rules, more scrutiny, and to defend the country, you have to defend the <span class="keyword">border</span>.</span>
        [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech298">[source] </a> You know, I think we need to set the record straight on this, because I
        think Marco misspoke about the bill. <span class="anecdote">On the Gang of Eight bill, there was no provisions
        really for extra scrutiny or safety for <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. At the time the bill came up, two <span class="immigrant">Iraqi
        refugees</span> came to my home town, Bowling Green, Kentucky. Their fingerprints were on a bomb
        from Iraq. They were in the database, but we didn't pick them up.</span> 
         <span class="anecdote">We relocated them here,
        put them in government housing, got them on food stamps. And we began providing for them,
        but we didn't have adequate security.</span> On the Gang of Eight bill, on Marco's bill, we had an
        opportunity. There was a conservative consensus for an amendment I put forward called Trust,
        But Verify that would have strengthened border security on both refugees, students and those
        coming here. And Marco sided and I guess was more sympathetic to Chuck Schumer and to the
        president than he was to conservative principles. But this goes directly to national
        defense. And if he wants to run as a national — national defense conservative, he's got to
        explain why he hasn't stepped up to support <span class="keyword">border</span> security.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech302">[source] </a> What my bill would do would be only for <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> going forward. So I
        haven't taken a position on sending anyone home. <span class="trope">But I have taken the position that we have
        a lot of problems here in our country. And that one of the things that we do — charity is
        about giving your own money. Charity isn't giving someone else's money. To put everyone in
        government housing and food stamps and bring them in from around the world I think is a
        mistake. To give of your own money, I've given to my church. My church has helped people
        that came from Bosnia. That's a good thing. But we shouldn't have a program where we just
        say that we're going to take care of the world's refugees. Nobody in the Middle East is
        doing anything.</span> Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Kuwait — all the Gulf nations are doing nothing. They
        need to step up and take...[crosstalk] [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech103">[source] </a>Yeah, no, I think that's a — that's a huge mistake, to be closing
            down mosques. But I would say that if you want to defend the country, it begins with
                <span class="keyword">border security</span>. And this is where I've
            had my disagreement with Senator Rubio. <span class="anecdote">When he brought forward the "Gang of Eight" bill to give citizenship
                to those who came here illegally, I put forward an amendment that says we should
                have more scrutiny on those who are coming as students, those who are coming as
                    <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, those who are
                coming as <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>, because
                we had two <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> come to
                my town in Bowling Green and try to attack us.</span> Marco opposed this because
            they made a deal. He made a deal with Chuck Schumer that he would oppose any
            conservative amendments. And I think that's a mistake, and I just don't think Marco can
            have it both ways. You can't be in favor of defend us... [bell rings] ... against Islam
            — radical Islam — if you're not for <span class="keyword">border
                security</span>.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech185">[source] </a>I was there and I saw the debate. I saw Ted Cruz say, "we'll take
            citizenship off the table, and then the bill will pass, and I'm for the bill." The bill
            would involve legalization. He can't have it both ways. But what is particularly
            insulting, though, is that he is the king of saying, "you're for <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>." Everybody's
            for <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> except for Ted Cruz. But it's a falseness, and that's an authenticity
            problem — that everybody he knows is not as perfect as him because we're all for
            <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. I was for legalization. I think, frankly, if you have <span class="keyword">border security</span>, you can
            have legalization. So was Ted, but now he says it wasn't so. That's not true.</p>
      <h2>QUESTION</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech115">[source] </a>[through translator]: We have a question from the public. I
                want to go to Lucia Aquiette. She's an <span class="immigrant">immigrant</span> from Guatemala, she's here with her five children who
                have not seen their father since he was deported three years ago. She has a question
                for both of you. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech170">[source] </a>[through translator]: The two candidates did a good action of
                talking, explaining, but what concerned me a bit is that we — we haven't seen the
                plan of Senator Bernie Sanders, and we have not seen a plan in writing from
                Secretary Hillary Clinton. So we want to see what she says. That is important, The
                six months — that we have seen as <span class="immigration">immigration</span> is concerned, and we see that they're moving towards.
                The community needs to not only <span class="keyword">immigration
                    reform</span>, but the raids have to stop. Families that we have seen that
                are suffering, they have to be reunited. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech172">[source] </a>[through translator]: I believe that this was the saddest
                moment that we had here at the debate, a mother with her children, separated from
                her husband. And those children suffering because they do not have their father. And
                this is what we see that is happening, that Republicans are doing not — by not
                approving a <span class="keyword">migratory reform</span>, but also
                President Obama. So we need — we need not only words, but plans as well. And we need
                as a community to both stand up and support women as her. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech304">[source] </a> My name is Carla Hernandez. I'm from the University of Texas at
        Austin. And my question is directed to all the candidates. If the Bible clearly states that
        we need to embrace those in need and not fear, how can we justify not accepting <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>?
        [end video]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech199">[source] </a>I'm Dulce Candy, a Youtube creator who immigrated to the United
            States from Mexico when I was a little girl. Since then, I am proud to say I served in
            the armed forces in Iraq, became a citizen and I am now an entrepreneur. There are many
            <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> who contribute positively to the American economy, but some of the comments
            in the campaign make us question our place in this country. If America does not seem
            like a welcoming place for <span class="immigrant">immigrant</span> entrepreneurs, will the American economy
            suffer?</p>
      <h2>QUICK</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech243">[source] </a> Mr. Trump, let's stay on this issue of <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. You have been
            very critical of Mark Zuckerberg of Facebook who has wanted to increase the number of
            these H1Bs.</p>
      <h2>QUINTANILLA</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech93">[source] </a> We will come around the bend, I promise. This one is for
            Senator Rubio. You've been a young man in a hurry ever since you won your first election
            in your 20s. You've had a big accomplishment in the Senate, an <span class="keyword">immigration bill</span>
            providing a <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span> the conservatives in your party hate, and even you don't
            support anymore. Now, you're skipping more votes than any senator to run for president.
            Why not slow down, get a few more things done first or least finish what you
            start?</p>
      <h2>RAMOS</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech38">[source] </a> On [inaudible], people are talking about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, and this map shows
                where in the country they are talking about it the most. Maria Elena? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech55">[source] </a> Senator, Secretary, we're going to take a break and we'll
                continue talking about <span class="immigration">immigration</span> when we come back. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech57">[source] </a>[through translator]: So this is the moment of talking about
                deportations. We're going to <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech60">[source] </a> And can you promise that you won't deport <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> who don't have a
                criminal record? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech64">[source] </a> So secretary, you seem to be defending President Obama's
                deportation policy. And as you know, so far he has deported more than 2.5 million
                    <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. So if you
                really don't want to be the next deporter in chief, can you promise tonight that you
                won't deport children and that you won't deport <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> who don't have a criminal record and
                this time, could I get a yes or no answer? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech68">[source] </a> OK. So I want to be very specific. So you are telling us
                tonight that if you become president you won't deport <span class="immigrant">children</span> who are already here? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech70">[source] </a> And that you won't deport <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> who don't have a criminal record? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech80">[source] </a> And can you promise not to deport <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> who don't have a criminal record? </p>
      <h2>RUBIO</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech68">[source] </a> Let me set the record straight on a couple of things. The first is,
            the evidence is now clear that the majority of people coming across the <span class="keyword">border</span> are not from Mexico. They're coming from Guatemala,
            El Salvador, Honduras. Those countries are the source of the people that are now coming
            in its majority. <span class="platform">I also believe
                we need a <span class="keyword">fence</span>. The problem is if El Chapo builds a tunnel under the <span class="keyword">fence</span>, we have
                to be able to deal with that too. And that's why you need an <span class="keyword">e-verify system</span> and you need an entry-exit tracking system and all
                sorts of other things to prevent <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>.</span> But I
            agree with what Governor Kasich just said. People are frustrated. <span class="trope">This is the most generous country in the world
                when it comes to <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. There are a million people a year who <span class="immigration">legally immigrate</span> to the United States, and people feel like we're being taken advantage of.
                We feel like despite our generosity, we're being taken advantage of.</span> And let
            me tell you who never gets talked about in these debates. The people that call my
            office, who have been waiting for 15 years to come to the United States. And they've
            paid their fees, and they hired a lawyer, and they can't get in. And they're wondering,
            maybe they should come illegally. [applause] And so these are important issues, and we
            should address it. It's a serious problem that needs to be addressed, and otherwise
            we're going to keep talking about this for the next 30 years, like we have for the last
            30 years. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech299">[source] </a> Ms. Dana, I agree that English is the unifying language of our
            country, and everyone should learn to speak it. It's important. <span class="anecdote">I want to tell you a
            story about someone that didn't speak English that well. It was my grandfather; he came
            to this country in the 1960s, as a — escaping Cuba. And he lived with us, growing up.
            And my grandfather loved America. He understood what was so special about this country.
            He loved Ronald Reagan; he would be very proud of the fact that we're here this evening.
            My grandfather instilled in me the belief that I was blessed to live in the one society
            in all of human history where even I, the son of a bartender and a maid, could aspire to
            have anything, and be anything that I was willing to work hard to achieve. But he taught
            me that in Spanish, because it was the language he was most comfortable in. And he
            became a conservative, even though he got his news in Spanish.</span> And so, I do give
            interviews in Spanish, and here's why — because <span class="trope">I believe that free enterprise and
            limited government is the best way to help people who are trying to achieve upward
            mobility. And if they get their news in Spanish, I want them to hear that directly from
            me. Not from a translator at Univision.</span> 
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech312">[source] </a> Well, let me say that <span class="immigration">legal immigration</span> is not an issue I read
            about in the newspaper. <span class="immigration">Immigration</span>, <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>, all the good aspects of
            <span class="immigration">immigration</span> and all the negative ones as well, I live with. My family's <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. My
            neighbors are all <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. My in-laws are all <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. So I've seen every aspect
            of it, and I can tell you America doesn't have one <span class="immigration">immigration</span> problem, it has three.
            First, despite the fact that we are the most generous country in the history of the
            world in allowing people to come here legally, we have people still coming illegally.
            Second, we have a legal <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> that no longer works. It primary is built on
            the basis of whether you have a relative living here instead of merit. And third, we
            have 11 million or 12 million people, many of whom have been here for longer than a
            decade who are already here illegally. And we must deal with all three of these
            problems. We cannot deal with all three of these problems in one massive piece of
            legislation. I learned that. We tried it that way. Here's the way forward: First, we
            must — we must secure our <span class="keyword">border</span>, the physical
                <span class="keyword">border</span>, with — with a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, absolutely. But we also need to have an entry/exit tracking
            system. 40 percent of the people who come here illegally come legally, and then they
            <span class="keyword">overstay the visa</span>. We also need a mandatory <span class="keyword">e-verify</span> system. After we've done that, step two would be to modernize
            our legal <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> so you come to America on the basis of what you can
            contribute economically, not whether or not simply you have a relative living here. And
            after we've done those two things, I believe the American people... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1034">[source] </a> Ms. Dana, I agree that English is the unifying language of our
                country, and everyone should learn to speak it. It's important. <span class="anecdote">I want to tell you a story about
                    someone that didn't speak English that well. It was my grandfather; he came to
                    this country in the 1960s, as a — escaping Cuba. And he lived with us, growing
                    up. And my grandfather loved America. He understood what was so special about
                    this country. He loved Ronald Reagan; he would be very proud of the fact that
                    we're here this evening. My grandfather instilled in me the belief that I was
                    blessed to live in the one society in all of human history where even I, the son
                    of a bartender and a maid, could aspire to have anything, and be anything that I
                    was willing to work hard to achieve. But he taught me that in Spanish, because
                    it was the language he was most comfortable in. And he became a conservative,
                    even though he got his news in Spanish.</span> And so, I do give interviews
                in Spanish, and here's why — because <span class="trope">I believe that free enterprise and limited government is the best
                    way to help people who are trying to achieve upward mobility. And if they get
                    their news in Spanish, I want them to hear that directly from me. Not from a
                    translator at Univision.</span>
            </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1047">[source] </a> Well, let me say that <span class="immigration">legal immigration</span> is not an issue I read
                about in the newspaper. <span class="immigration">Immigration</span>, <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>, all the good
                aspects of <span class="immigration">immigration</span>
                and all the negative ones as well, I live with. My family's <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. My neighbors are all
                    <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. My in-laws
                are all <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. So I've
                seen every aspect of it, and I can tell you America doesn't have one immigration
                problem, it has three. First, despite the fact that we are the most generous country
                in the history of the world in allowing people to come here legally, we have people
                still coming illegally. Second, we have a legal immigration system that no longer
                works. It primary is built on the basis of whether you have a relative living here
                instead of merit. And third, we have 11 million or 12 million people, many of whom
                have been here for longer than a decade who are already here illegally. And we must
                deal with all three of these problems. We cannot deal with all three of these
                problems in one massive piece of legislation. I learned that. We tried it that way.
                Here's the way forward: First, we must — we must secure our <span class="keyword">border</span>, the physical <span class="keyword">border</span>, with —
                with a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, absolutely. But we also need to have an
                entry/exit tracking system. 40 percent of the people who come here illegally come
                legally, and then they overstay the visa. We also need a mandatory <span class="keyword">e-verify</span> system. After we've done that, step two would
                be to modernize our legal immigration system so you come to America on the basis of
                what you can contribute economically, not whether or not simply you have a relative
                living here. And after we've done those two things, I believe the American people... </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech239">[source] </a> Well, first of all, if a company gets caught doing that, they
            should never be able to use the program again. If you get caught abusing this program,
            you should never be able to use it again. The second thing I said is we need to add
            reforms, not just increase the numbers, but add reforms. <span class="platform">For example, before you hire
            anyone from abroad, you should have to advertise that job for 180 days. You also have to
            prove that you're going to pay these people more than you would pay someone else, so
            that you're not undercutting it by bringing in cheap labor.</span> But here's the best solution
            of all. We need to get back to training people in this country to do the jobs of the
            21st century. Why, for the life of me, I do not understand why did we stop doing
            vocational education in America, people that can work with their hands; people you can
            train to do this work while they're still in high school so they can graduate ready to
            go work. But the best way to close this gap is to modernize higher education so
            Americans have the skills for those jobs. But in the interim, in the absence of that,
            what's happening is some of these tech companies are taking those — those centers (ph)
            to Canada because they can get people to go over there instead of here. But the ideal
            scenario is to train Americans to do the work so we don't have to rely on people from
            abroad.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech333">[source] </a> Thank you. Well, I've learned the rules on this. [laughter] Look,
            in addition to what Donald was saying is we also need to talk about the legal<span class="keyword">immigration system</span> for permanent residents. Today, we have a legal<span class="keyword">immigration system</span>
            for permanent residency that is largely based on whether or not you have a relative
            living here. And that's the way my parents came legally in 1956. But in 2015, we have a
            very different economy. <span class="trope">Our legal<span class="keyword">immigration system</span>
                from now on has to be merit-based.
            It has to be based on what skills you have, what you can contribute economically</span>, <span class="trope">and
            most important of all, on whether or not you're coming here to become an American, not
            just live in America, but be an American.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech252">[source] </a> Yeah. <span class="anecdote">Immigration is not an issue that I read about in the newspaper or
        watch a documentary on PBS or CNN. It's an issues I've lived around my whole life. My family
        are immigrants. My wife's family are immigrants. All of my neighbors are immigrants. I see
        every aspect of this problem. The good, the bad, and the ugly. And here's what we learned in
        2013. The American people don't trust the Federal Government to enforce our immigration
        laws, and we will not be able to do anything on immigration until we first prove to the
        American people that illegal immigration is under control. And we can do that. We know what
        it takes to do that.</span> It takes at least 20,000 more additional <span class="keyword">border</span> agents. It takes
        completing those 700 miles of fencing. It takes a mandatory <span class="keyword">e-verify</span> system and a mandatory
        entry/exit tracking system to prevent overstays. After we have done that, the second thing
        we have to do is reform and modernize the legal <span class="keyword">immigration system</span>.<span class="trope"> And after we have done
        those two things, I think the American people are gonna be reasonable with what do you do
        with someone who has been in this country for 10 or 12 years who hasn't otherwise violated
        our laws — because if they're a criminal they can't stay. They'll have to undergo a
        background check, pay a fine, start paying taxes. And ultimately, they'll given a work
        permit and that's all they're gonna be allowed to have for at least 10 years.</span> But you can't
        get to that third step until you have done the other two things, and that was the lesson we
        learned in 2013. There is no trust that the Federal Government will enforce the law. They
        will not support you until you see it done first.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech254">[source] </a> But I've answered that question repeatedly. I am personally open —
        after all that has happened and after ten years in that probationary status where all they
        have is a permit, I personally am open to allowing people to apply for a green card. That
        may not be a majority position in my party, but that's down the road. You can't even begin
        that process until you prove to people — not just pass a law that says you're gonna bring
        <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> under control. You're gonna have to do it and prove to people that it's
        working. And that was the lesson of 2013. And it's more true today, than it was then. After
        a migratory crisis on the <span class="keyword">border</span> with minors coming over that you're seeing start up again
        now, after all these executive orders the President has issued. More than ever we need
        to...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech256">[source] </a> ... prove to people that <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is under control.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech260">[source] </a> Yeah, a couple points. In 2013 we had never faced a crisis like the
        <span class="immigrant">Syrian refugee</span> crisis now. Up until that point, a <span class="immigrant">refugee</span> meant someone fleeing oppression,
        fleeing Communism like it is in my community. As far as Ted's record, I'm always puzzled by
        his attack on this issue. Ted, you support legalizing people who are in this country
        illegally. Ted Cruz supported a 500-percent increase in the number of H-1 visas, the <span class="immigrant">guest
        workers</span> that are allowed into this country, and Ted supports doubling the number of green
        cards. So I think what's important for us to understand and there is a way forward on this
        issue that we can bring our country together on. And while I'm president I will do it. And it
        will begin by bringing <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> under control and proving to the American
        people.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech300">[source] </a> Well, he's just admitted — as he's just admitted, the reason why those
        <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> were allowed in was because they messed up in how they used the actual database.
        They should have known. They didn't because they didn't run the actual law as it exists now.
        It didn't work well.<span class="trope"> As far as the <span class="immigrant">refugees</span> are concerned, it's not that America doesn't
        want to accept refugees, Wolf. It's that we may not be able to, because this is an issue we
        have to be 100 percent right on. If we allow 9,999 Syrian refugees into the United States,
        and all of them are good people, but we allow one person in who's an ISIS killer — we just
        get one person wrong, we've got a serious problem.</span> And there is not a single person in the
        national defense apparatus of this country that can guarantee you are going to be 100
        percent right. <span class="platform">And that's why as president, I'll take this very seriously.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech147">[source] </a>Never support. Never have and never will support any effort to grant
            blanket legalization <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> to folks who have
            entered, or stayed in this country illegally. [end video clip] [begin video
            clip]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech148">[source] </a>First of all, earned <span class="keyword">path to
                citizenship</span> is basically code for <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. It's what they call it. And, the reality of it is this, it is
            unfair to the people that have legally entered this country to create an alternative for
            individuals who entered illegally, and knowingly did so. [end video clip] [begin video
            clip]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech149">[source] </a>You cannot grant <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. If the
            American people see us granting <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> they will
            never again believe in <span class="immigration">legal
                immigration</span>. They will never again support it, and that's wrong for
            our country, bad for our future. [end video clip]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech151">[source] </a>No, because if you look at the quote, and it's very specific. And,
            it says blanket <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, I do not support blanket
                <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech153">[source] </a>... I do not support<span class="keyword">
            amnesty</span>...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech155">[source] </a>... No, I said I do not support blanket <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech159">[source] </a>... It absolutely has been, and at the time in the context of that
            was in 2009, and 2010, where the last effort for legalization was an effort done in the
            Senate. It was an effort led by several people that provided almost an instant path with
            very little obstacles moving forward. What I've always said is that this issue does need
            to be solved. They've been talking about this issue for 30 years, and nothing ever
            happens. And, I'm going to tell you exactly how we're going to deal with it when I am
            president. <span class="platform">Number one,
                we're going to keep ISIS out of America. If we don't know who you are, or why you're
                coming, you will not get into the United States.</span>
            <span class="platform">Number two, we're going to
                enforce our <span class="immigration">immigration</span>
                laws.</span>
            <span class="anecdote">I am the son and grandson of
                immigrants. And I know that securing our <span class="keyword">borders</span> is
                not anti-immigrant and we will do it.</span> We'll hire 20,000 new border agents
            instead of 20,000 new IRS agents. We will finish the 700 miles of <span class="keyword">fencing</span> and <span class="keyword">walls</span> our nation needs. We'll
            have mandatory <span class="keyword">E-verify</span>, a mandatory entry/exit
            tracking system and until all of that is in place and all of that is working and we can
            prove to the people of this country that <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is under control,
            nothing else is going to happen. We are not going to round up and deport 12 million
                <span class="immigrant">people</span>, but we're not going to
            hand out citizenship cards, either. There will be a process. We will see what the
            American people are willing to support. But it will not be unconstitutional executive
            orders like the ones Barack Obama has forced on us.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech164">[source] </a>It's interesting that Jeb mentions the book. That's the book where
            you changed your position on <span class="immigration">immigration</span> because you used to support a <span class="keyword">path to
            citizenship</span>.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech168">[source] </a>You wrote a book where you changed your position from a <span class="keyword">path of
            citizenship</span> to a path of legalization.<span class="trope"> And the bottom line is this, we are not going to
            be able to do anything on this issue until we first bring <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> under
            control. The American people have been told for 30 years they're going to enforce the
            <span class="keyword">border</span>, they're going to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span> and it never gets built and it never happens. It
            is very clear there will be no progress on this issue in any way, shape or form, until
            you prove to the people of this country that <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is under control. And
            when I'm president, we are going to bring it under control once and for all after 30
            years of talking about it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech175">[source] </a>There's not going to be consensus on this issue until we enforce our
            <span class="immigration">immigration</span> laws. That is abundantly clear. You're not going to be able to ram down the
            throat of the American people your approach. The only way we're are going to be able to
            move forward after two migratory crises with minor, after two unconstitutional executive
            orders, the only way forward on this issue is to first bring <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> under
            control. And until that happens there's not going to be consensus on this
            issue.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech191">[source] </a>... no, I understand, but let me respond. I was mentioned on this —
            in this answer, and so I'm going to respond this way. This is the lie that Ted's
            campaign is built on, and Rand touched upon it — that he's the most conservative guy,
            and everyone else is a — you know, everyone else is a rhino. The truth is, Ted,
            throughout this campaign, you've been willing to say or do anything in order to get
            votes. Ted, you worked for George W. Bush's campaign... [booing] You — you — you helped
            design George W. Bush's — you helped design George W. Bush's <span class="immigration">immigration</span> policy. And
            then, when you got to the Senate, you did an interview with CBS News — I wasn't even
            part of the video — where you said, on the issue of <span class="immigrant">people</span> that are here illegally, "we
            can reach a compromise." And then in the committee, you said, "I want to bring people
            out of the shadows." [bell rings] Now you want to trump Trump on <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. But you
            can't — we're not gonna beat Hillary Clinton with someone who's willing to say or do
            anything to win an election.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech205">[source] </a>And I think that's the false choice... [applause] ... that's the —
            that's the false choice in this whole debate about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. Of course, we're going
            to be a nation of immigrants. By the way, no nation on earth is more generous than
            America is. Every single year close to a million people emigrate to the United States
            legally. There's no nation on earth that comes close to that number. <span class="trope">I think the only
            argument is are we a sovereign country, are we not allowed to choose who comes in, when
            they come in and how they come in? And that's not what's happening now.</span>
            [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-28.xhtml#speech207">[source] </a>I think the other problem is we have a legal <span class="immigration">immigration</span> system
            that's outdated, it's primarily based on whether you have family members living here. In
            the 21st century, it has to be more of a merit-based system, and that is why our legal
            <span class="immigration">immigration</span> system is in need of modernization. And we will always celebrate legal
            immigration like Dulce's great story.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech107">[source] </a>Here's the bottom line. We can't get that legislation passed.
                The American people will not support doing anything about <span class="immigrant">people</span> that are in this
                country illegally until the law is enforced first, and you prove it to them. This
                has been abundantly clear. Every effort over the last ten years to do those
                comprehensively has failed. And it has failed because the American people have zero
                trust that the federal government will enforce our laws. And that's why since then,
                I have said repeatedly, if you are serious about <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, then the key
                that unlocks the door to being able to do that is not just to pass a law that says
                it is going to enforce the law, but to actually do it. To hire the 20,000 new <span class="keyword">border</span>
                agents, to finish the <span class="keyword">fencing</span> and <span class="keyword">walls</span>, to put in place mandatory <span class="keyword">e-verify</span>, to put
                in place an entry-exit tracking system to prevent <span class="keyword">visa overstays</span>. <span class="trope">And once that is
                in place and that's working, I believe the American people will support a very
                reasonable, but responsible approach to people that have been here a long time, who
                are not dangerous criminals, who pay taxes and pay fines for what they did. But
                until then, none of that is going to be possible.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech109">[source] </a>Well, the legislation passed, but it has no support. In essence,
                it couldn't pass in the House, it will never pass in the United States until we
                secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>, and it is not the way we're going to do when I'm president. <span class="platform">When
                I'm president, we are going to enforce the law first, prove to people that <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> is under control. And then we'll see what the American people are
                willing to support when it comes to <span class="immigrant">people</span> that are not criminals, who have been in
                the this country for a long time and who otherwise would like to stay.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech113">[source] </a>Leadership is ultimately about solving the problem. And the approach that was tried and has been tried now repeatedly over ten years to do this comprehensively, all at once in a massive piece of legislation has no chance of passage.

It is not leadership to continue to try something that has no chance of happening. I want to make progress on this issue. It has been discussed now for 30 years and nothing ever happens.

And I am telling you that the only way forward on this issue that has any chance of happening, meaning gaining the support of the American people, you cannot do this without the support of the American people, is an approach that begins by proving that once and for all, <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is under control.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech162">[source] </a>Well, first of all, I think <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> is the forgiveness of a wrongdoing without consequence and that —
            I've never supported that. I do not support that. I think there has to be consequences
            for violating our <span class="keyword">immigration laws</span>. What I
            think is clear about this issue to begin with is we're not going to be able to make
            progress on <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> until first, <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is brought under
            control. You go back to 1986, when they legalized three million <span class="immigrant">people</span> and they promised to secure the
                <span class="keyword">border</span>. It didn't happen, and as a result, people
            have lost trust in the federal government. It is now clear that the only way to make
            progress on <span class="immigration">immigration</span> is
            not just to pass a law that enforces the law, but actually prove to people that it's
            working. They want to see the <span class="keyword">wall</span> built. They want to
            see the additional <span class="keyword">border agents</span>. They want to
            see <span class="keyword">E-Verify</span>. They want to see an entry-exit tracking
            system. Forty percent of the <span class="immigrant">people in this
                country illegally</span> are entering legally and <span class="keyword">overstaying visas</span>. And only after all of that is in place, then we'll see
            what the American people are willing to support on this issue. I think the American
            people will be very reasonable, but responsible, about how you handle someone who has
            been here a long time, who can pass a background check, who pays a fine and starts
            paying taxes and all they want is a work permit. But you can't do any of that until you
            prove to people that <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> is under control once and for all. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech170">[source] </a>We're going to have to do this again, O.K.? When that issue was
            being debated, Ted Cruz, at a committee hearing, very passionately said, I want <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> to pass, I want <span class="immigrant">people</span> to be able to come out of the
            shadows. And he proposed an amendment that would legalize <span class="immigrant">people</span> here. Not only that, he proposed doubling the
            number of green cards. He proposed a 500 percent increase on guest workers. Now his
            position is different. Now he is a passionate opponent of all those things. So he either
            wasn't telling the truth then or he isn't telling the truth now, but to argue he is a
            purist on <span class="immigration">immigration</span> is just not true. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech290">[source] </a>Well, no. It's not the case. It didn't pass, and we haven't
                solved <span class="immigration">immigration</span> in
                this country. It's still a problem. It is worse today than it was three years ago,
                which is worse than it was five years ago. And it has to be confronted and solved.
                But the only way forward on this issue — you asked a question about flexibility. Let
                me tell you about that. One of the things that you need in leadership is the ability
                to understand that to get things done, you must figure out the way to get it done.
                You will not pass comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration
                    reform</span>. People do not trust the federal government. They want to see
                the law being enforced. They want to see <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> come under control.
                They want to see that <span class="keyword">wall</span>. They want to see <span class="keyword">E-Verify</span>. They want to see all of these things
                working, and then they will have a conversation with you about what do you do with
                    <span class="immigrant">people that have been here a long time
                    that are otherwise, you know, not criminals</span>. But they're not going
                to do it until you first enforce the law.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech68">[source] </a> Let me set the record straight on a couple of things. The first is,
            the evidence is now clear that the majority of people coming across the <span class="keyword">border</span> are not
            from Mexico. They're coming from Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras. Those countries are
            the source of the people that are now coming in its majority. <span class="platform">I also believe we need a fence. The problem is if El
                Chapo builds a tunnel under the fence, we have to be able to deal with that too. And
                that's why you need an <span class="keyword">e-verify system</span> and you
                need an entry-exit tracking system and all sorts of other things to prevent
                    <span class="immigration">illegal
                    immigration</span>.</span> But I agree with what Governor Kasich just
            said. People are frustrated. <span class="trope">This
                is the most generous country in the world when it comes to immigration. There are a
                million people a year who legally immigrate to the United States, and people feel
                like we're being taken advantage of. We feel like despite our generosity, we're
                being taken advantage of.</span> And let me tell you who never gets talked about in
            these debates. The people that call my office, who have been waiting for 15 years to
            come to the United States. And they've paid their fees, and they hired a lawyer, and
            they can't get in. And they're wondering, maybe they should come illegally. [applause]
            And so these are important issues, and we should address it. It's a serious problem that
            needs to be addressed, and otherwise we're going to keep talking about this for the next
            30 years, like we have for the last 30 years. </p>
      <h2>SALINAS</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech39">[source] </a> So Secretary, I have a question for you. In 2003, you said on
                a radio show, specifically it was John Gambling's radio show in New York, that you
                were adamantly against <span class="immigrant">illegal
                    immigrants</span> and that people have to stop employing <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>.
                    <span class="trope">Your new
                        <span class="immigration">immigration</span>
                    plan is that you would expand President Obama's executive actions and that you
                    would push for legislation that would include a <span class="keyword">path to citizenship</span> for <span class="keyword">undocumented immigrants.</span>
         </span>
                So, are you flip-flopping on this issue? Or are you pandering to Latinos, what some
                would call Hispandering? [laughter] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech41">[source] </a> Now, Senator Sanders, in 2007, you voted against <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>. You now say that it was
                because the bill had guestworker provisions which seemed semi-slavery. But back
                then, this is what you said to CNN's Lou Dobbs. Let's listen. [begin video clip] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech43">[source] </a> So, Senator, were you concerned with working conditions for
                guestworkers, or really because you think <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span> drive down wages and take jobs from
                Americans? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech106">[source] </a> We have to move on. Senator, the time is up. We have to move
                on. [applause] Next question. Secretary Clinton, you recently said instead of
                building walls we need to tear down barriers. However, last November in New
                Hampshire, you openly said that as senator you voted numerous times to build
                    <span class="keyword">the wall</span> with Mexico. What's the difference
                between what you did, voting to build <span class="keyword">the wall</span>, and
                what Donald Trump wants to do now? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech108">[source] </a> But the question is, what is the difference between <span class="keyword">the wall</span> that you voted for and Donald Trump's wall? </p>
      <h2>SANDERS</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech288">[source] </a> I didn't leave anybody at the altar. I voted against that piece
            of legislation because it had guest-worker provisions in it which the Southern Poverty
            Law Center talked about being semi-slavery. <span class="trope">
            <span class="immigrant">Guest
                    workers</span> are coming in, they're working under terrible conditions,
                but if they stand up for their rights, they're thrown out of the country.</span> I
            was not the only progressive to vote against that legislation for that reason. Tom
            Harkin, a very good friend of Hillary Clinton's and mine, one of the leading labor
            advocates, also voted against that. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech290">[source] </a> I know that. But point being is that progressives did vote
            against that for that reason. My view right now — and always has been — is that when you
            have 11 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                people</span> in this country, <span class="trope">we need comprehensive immigration reform, we need a path toward
                citizenship, we need to take people out of the shadows.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-11-14.xhtml#speech55">[source] </a> Let me do that but let me pick up on an issue, a very important issue
            that we have not yet discussed. This nation is the most powerful military in the world.
            We're spending over $600 billion a year on the military and yet, significantly less than
            10 percent of that money is used to be fighting international terrorism. We are spending
            hundreds of billions of dollars maintaining 5,000 nuclear weapons. I think we need major
            reform in the military, making it more cost effective, but also focusing on the real
            crisis that faces us. The Cold War is over. And our focus has got to be on intelligence,
            increased manpower, fighting internationally targets. <span class="trope">So, in terms of <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>, I
            believe that the United States has the moral responsibility with Europe, with Gulf
            countries like Saudi Arabia to make sure that when people leave countries like
            Afghanistan and Syria with nothing more than the clothing on their back that, of course,
            we reach out.</span> Now, what the magic number is, I don't know, because we don't know the
            extent of the problem. But I certainly think that the United States should take its full
            responsibility in helping those people. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech27">[source] </a> I'm one of the 77 percent. I think this is a very difficult issue.
            Let me agree with much of what the secretary and the governor have said. Let me tell you
            what I think we have got to do. I think it's a two-pronged issue. Number one, our goal
            is to crush and destroy ISIS. What is the best way to do it? Well, I think there are
            some differences of opinion here, perhaps between the secretary and myself. I voted
            against the war in Iraq because I thought unilateral military action would not produce
            the results that were necessary and would lead to the kind of unraveling and instability
            that we saw in the Middle East. I do not believe in unilateral American action. I
            believe in action in which we put together a strong coalition of forces, major powers
            and the Muslim nations. I think one of the heroes in a real quagmire out there, in a
            dangerous and difficult world; one of the heroes who we should recognize in the Middle
            East is King Abdullah II of Jordan. This small country has welcomed in many <span class="immigrant">refugees</span>. And Abdullah said something
            recently, very important. He said, "Yes, international terrorism is by definition an
            international issue, but it is primarily an issue of the Muslim nations who are fighting
            for the soul of Islam. We the Muslims should lead the effort on the ground." And I
            believe he is absolutely right. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-12-19.xhtml#speech310">[source] </a>
            <span class="anecdote">Well, thank you very much for hosting
                this debate, and let me applaud my colleagues up here. Because I think frankly,
                maybe I'm wrong, but on our worst day, I think we have a lot more to offer the
                American people than the right wing's extremists. [applause] My father came to this
                country from Poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his pocket, which sparked
                my interest in the need for <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> because I know what it's like to be the
                    <span class="immigrant">son of an
                    immigrant</span>. We grew up in a three-and-a-half-room, rent controlled
                apartment in Brooklyn, New York. My mother's dream -- and she died very young, but
                my mother's dream for her whole life was to be able to get out of that
                rent-controlled apartment and own a home of her own. She never lived to see
                that.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech206">[source] </a> ... I am absolutely supportive of comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> and a <span class="trope">
            <span class="keyword">path towards citizenship</span> for 11 million people today who are living in the shadows</span>. All right? We got to do that. [applause]

But you miss—when you looked at the issues, you missed two of the most important. And that is you're not going to accomplish what has to be done for working families and the middle class unless there is campaign finance reform. [applause]

So long as big money interests control the United States Congress, it is gonna be very hard to do what has to be done for working families. So let me be very clear. No nominee of mine, if I'm elected president, to the United States Supreme Court will get that nomination unless he or she is loud and clear, and says they will vote to overturn Citizens United. [applause]

Second point—second point is that the only way we make change in terms of health care, in terms of dealing with a broken criminal justice system which, today, allows us to have more people in jail than any other country—largely African-American and Latino—the only way we create millions of jobs by rebuilding our infrastructure or have a tax system that says to the wealthy that they are going to pay their fair share, is when millions of people become involved in the political process.

No, you just can't negotiate with Mitch McConnell. Mitch is gonna have to look out the window and see a whole lot of people saying, "Mitch, stop representing the billionaire class. Start listening to working families."

And as president, that's what I will work hard on. [applause]

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-11.xhtml#speech60">[source] </a> The answer is yes. We've got <span class="immigrant">11 million undocumented people</span> in this
            country. <span class="anecdote">I have talked to some of the young kids with tears rolling down their cheeks,
            are scared to death that today they may or their parents may be <span class="keyword">deported</span>.</span> I believe that
            we have got to pass comprehensive <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, something that I strongly
            supported. <span class="trope">I believe that we have got to move toward a <span class="keyword">path toward citizenship</span>.</span> I agree
            with President Obama who used executive orders to protect families because the Congress,
            the House was unable or refused to act. And in fact I would go further. <span class="trope">What would
            motivate me and what would be the guiding light for me in terms of <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>,
            Judy, is to bring families together, not divide them up.</span> And let me say this also.
            Somebody who is very fond of the president, agrees with him most of the time, I disagree
            with his recent deportation policies. And I would not support those. <span class="trope">Bottom line is a
            <span class="keyword">path towards citizenship</span> for 11 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented people</span>, if Congress doesn't do the
            right thing, we use the executive orders of the president.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-11.xhtml#speech62">[source] </a> Secretary Clinton, I do have a disagreement here. If my memory is
            correct, <span class="anecdote">I think when we saw children coming from these horrendous, horrendously violent
            areas of Honduras and neighboring countries, people who are fleeing drug violence and
            cartel violence, I thought it was a good idea to allow those children to stay in this
            country</span>. That was not, as I understand it, the secretary's position. In terms of 2007
            <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>, yeah, I did vote against it. I voted against it because the Southern
            Poverty Law Center, among other groups, said that the <span class="immigrant">guest-worker</span> programs that were
            embedded in this agreement were akin to slavery. Akin to slavery, where people came into
            this country to do guest work were abused, were exploited, and if they stood up for
            their rights, they'd be thrown out of this country. So it wasn't just me who opposed it.
            It was LULAC, one of the large Latino organizations in this country. It was the AFL-CIO.
            It was some of the most progressive members of the United States Congress who opposed it
            for that reason. But we are where we are right now. And where we are right now is we
            have got to stand up to the Trumps of the world who are trying to divide us up. <span class="trope">What we
            have to do right now is bring our people together and understand that we must provide a
            <span class="keyword">path towards citizenship</span> for 11 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented people</span>.</span> 
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech13">[source] </a> Thank you — thank you all very much. I'm running for
                president of the United States because given the crises facing our country, it is
                just too late for establishment politics and establishment economics. Together we're
                going to have to overturn this disastrous Citizens United Supreme Court decision.
                [applause] Billionaires and Wall Street should not be buying elections. We've got to
                end this rigged economy where people are working longer hours for low wages, almost
                all new income and wealth going to the top 1 percent, and of course, <span class="platform">we need comprehensive
                        <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> and a
                        <span class="keyword">path toward
                    citizenship</span>.</span> And here in Miami...[applause]...here in Miami
                as much as any city in America, we know that we have got to combat climate change,
                transform our energy system, and leave this planet in a way that is healthy and
                habitable for our kids and our grandchildren. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech35">[source] </a> This is what I think. I think that the American people are
                never going to elect a president who insults Mexicans, who insults Muslims, who
                insults women, who insults African-Americans. And let us not forget that several
                years ago, Trump was in the middle of the so- called birther movement, trying to
                delegitimize the president of the United States of America. [applause] You know, I
                find it very interesting, Karen, my dad was born in Poland. I know a little bit
                about the <span class="immigrant">immigrant
                    experience</span>. Nobody has ever asked me for my birth certificate. Maybe
                it has something to do with the color of my skin. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech44">[source] </a> Well, you have guestworker programs that have been described
                by the Southern Poverty Law Center, one of the important institutions in this
                country who studies these issues, as guestworkers programs akin to slavery, where
                people came in. They were cheated. They were abused. They were humiliated. And if
                they stood up for their rights, they would be thrown out of the country. Of course,
                that type of [inaudible] leads to a race to the bottom for all of our people. And I
                worked very hard on that issue. And of course, I supported the 2013 <span class="keyword">immigration reform bill</span>. And what I believe
                right now is not only that we need <span class="keyword">comprehensive
                    immigration reform</span>, if the Congress does not do its job, as president
                of the United States I will use the executive powers of that office to do what has
                to be done, to do what President Obama did, and expand on that. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech49">[source] </a> Well, when we talk about efforts to assist <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>, Secretary Clinton
                prevailed upon the governor of New York, Elliot Spitzer, who wanted to do the right
                thing and provide driver's license to <span class="immigrant">these who were undocumented</span>, she
                said don't do it, and New York State still does not do it. In Vermont, by the way, I
                worked with officials and <span class="immigrant">undocumented people</span> in Vermont do have the ability to get driver's
                license. [applause] When we talk about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, the secretary will remember that
                one of the great tragedies, human tragedies of recent years is children came from
                Honduras where there's probably more violence than almost any place in this country,
                and they came into this country. And I said welcome those children into this
                country, Secretary Clinton said send them back. That's a difference. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech54">[source] </a> You know, Ted Kennedy was a very close friend of mine, and I
                served on the committee he chaired, the Health, Education, Labor Committee. And Ted
                Kennedy was kind enough to allow me to hold a hearing in 2008, I believe, in
                Congress, dealing with the plight of <span class="immigrant">undocumented tomato pickers</span> in
                Immokalee, Florida. [applause] And I went there on my own. Wasn't an issue really
                for the state of Vermont to expose the horrendous working conditions and the semi
                slavery, if you like, that <span class="immigrant">those
                    workers</span> lived under. And the result of that hearing and the work
                that many, many people did was to significantly improve the wages and working
                conditions of <span class="immigrant">those
                    workers</span>. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech79">[source] </a> Let me just say this. I don't think that the secretary fully
                answered your question, and I think the proof may be in the pudding. Honduras and
                that region of the world may be the most violent region in our hemisphere. Gang
                lords, vicious people torturing people, doing horrible things to families. Children
                fled that part of the world to try, try, try, try, maybe, to meet up with their
                family members in this country, taking a route that was horrific, trying to start a
                new life. Secretary Clinton did not support those children coming into this country.
                I did. Now I happen to agree with President Obama on many, many issues. I think he
                has done a great job as president of the United States. He is wrong on this issue of
                deportation. I disagree with him on that. [applause] So to answer your question, no,
                I will not deport <span class="immigrant">children</span>
                from the United States of America. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech83">[source] </a> Let me just answer, I want to get back to this 2007 <span class="keyword">immigration bill</span>. It's true, Ted Kennedy, a
                good friend of mine, and I think of the secretary's, did work very hard on that
                bill. But does anyone really believe that if that bill was all so good, as the
                secretary is touting, that LULAC and other major Latino organizations, the largest
                Latino organizations in this country said no to that bill. And I worked very hard in
                improving the guest worker provisions so that in 2013 a bill I strongly supported,
                people who were in the guest worker program in America would not be treated like
                slaves. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech112">[source] </a> I think the secretary and I mostly, I think, agree on this
                issue. Look, in this country, <span class="keyword">immigration
                    reform</span> is a very hot debate. It's divided the country. But I would
                hope very much, that as we have that debate, we do not, as Donald Trump and others
                have done, resort to racism and xenophobia and bigotry. [applause] This idea of
                suddenly, one day or maybe a night, rounding up 11 million <span class="immigrant">people</span> and taking them outside of
                this country is a vulgar, absurd idea that I would hope very few people in America
                support. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech118">[source] </a> Well, I absolutely support that. At the heart of my <span class="keyword">immigration policy</span> and I should say that the
                New York times editorial board called my <span class="keyword">immigration policy</span> the most progressive and the strongest of any
                candidate running. But to answer your question, the essence of what we are trying to
                do is to unite families, not to divide families. [applause] The idea that a mother
                is living here and her children are on the other side of the border is wrong and
                immoral. A number of months ago, I talked to a young man who was serving in the
                United States military and while he was serving in the military, his wife was
                deported. That is beyond comprehension and policies that should not be allowed to
                exist. So, ma'am, I will do everything that I can to unite your family. Your
                children deserve to be with their mother. [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-04-14.xhtml#speech401">[source] </a> I grew up in Brooklyn, New York...[applause]...the son of an
        <span class="immigrant">immigrant</span> who came to this country from Poland at the age of 17 without a nickel in his
        pocket, never made a whole lot of money, but was a very proud American, because this country
        gave him and my mom the opportunity to send their kids to college.</p>
      <h2>STRASSEL</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech163">[source] </a>Senator Cruz. Senator Cruz, you have promised to deport
                <span class="immigrant">illegal aliens</span>. You
            have also promised to reverse President Obama's executive action that gives temporary
                <span class="keyword">amnesty</span> to <span class="immigrant">illegals</span> brought here by their parent as children. As
            president, you would have the names and addresses of the some 800,000 of those that have
            registered under that action. Now, you have said that in this country, we shouldn't go
            door to door, look for <span class="immigrant">illegals</span>,
            but in this case you would have a list. Would you use it?</p>
      <h2>TAPPER</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech255">[source] </a> Welcome to CNN's Republican Presidential Debate. No topic perhaps
            has been more combustible in this campaign than the issue of <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. Mr. Trump, you have called for
            deporting every <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                immigrant</span>, Governor Christie has said, quote, "There are not enough law
            enforcement officers — local, county, state and federal combined — to forcibly deport 11
            to 12 million people." Tell Governor Christie how much your plan will cost, and how you
            will get it done. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech257">[source] </a> Governor Christie, you and I have talked about this in an
            interview. You say that his big <span class="keyword">wall</span>, his plan to
            deport 11 to 12 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span>, it sounds great, but it's never going to
            happen. Tell him why you're skeptical of his plans? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech265">[source] </a> With all due respect, you said about Donald Trump's plan to deport
            11 to 12 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span>, "People who say that have no idea what this
            entails." Why not? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech267">[source] </a> ...let's continue the conversation about <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> with
            Dana Bash. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech300">[source] </a> Thank you, Senator Rubio. [applause] Senator Cruz — Senator Cruz,
            this week, we learned more about Dr. Carson's plan for the 11 million to 12 million
            <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> in this country. Dr. Carson proposed giving these <span class="immigrant">undocumented
            immigrants</span> a six- month grace period to pay back taxes then to let them become guest
            workers and only to deport people who failed to do that. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech304">[source] </a> OK, from the horse's mouth, Senator Cruz, does that fit your
            definition of <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech310">[source] </a> We'll come back to you — we'll come back to you in one second,
            sir. But Senator Rubio, I'm not sure exactly whose plan he's — he's saying is —
            constitutes <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, but I know he has said it about
            your plan in the past, so I want to give you a chance to respond, then, Dr. Carson,
            we'll come to you. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech315">[source] </a> Thank you, Senator. Senator — Dr. Carson... [applause] ... I want
            to give you 30 seconds. I'd like you to answer the question. Senator Cruz describes
            plans such as yours as <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. Why is your plan not
                <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech317">[source] </a> Thank you, Dr. Carson. I want to talk about the issue of
            <span class="keyword">birthright citizenship</span>, which — which has emerged since the first debate as — as an a —
            a major issue in this campaign. Mr. Trump, you say that babies born in the United States
            to <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> should not any longer get automatic American citizenship. Ms.
            Fiorina says that you are pandering on this issue and acting like the politicians that
            you rail against. What's your message to Ms. Fiorina on <span class="keyword">birthright citizenship</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech319">[source] </a> Ms. Fiorina, the vast majority of countries do not have <span class="keyword">birthright
            citizenship</span>... [applause] ...Donald Trump is right about that. Why is it pandering when
            he's — he says this? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech335">[source] </a> Senator Paul, I want to bring you in. Where — where do you stand
            on the issue of <span class="keyword">birthright citizenship</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech722">[source] </a> That's a mouthful, but OK. [laughter]

OK, here's the more serious question, Ronald Reagan, the 40th President, used the plane behind you to accomplish a great many things. Perhaps, most notably, to challenge Mikhail Gorbachev to tear down the <span class="keyword">wall</span>, and ultimately, to make peace with the USSR.

How will the world look different once your Air Force One is parked in the hangar of your presidential library?

Senator Paul?
</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech990">[source] </a> Welcome to CNN's Republican Presidential Debate. No topic
                perhaps has been more combustible in this campaign than the issue of <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. Mr. Trump, you have
                called for deporting every <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrant</span>, Governor Christie has said, quote, "There
                are not enough law enforcement officers — local, county, state and federal combined
                — to forcibly deport 11 to 12 million people." Tell Governor Christie how much your
                plan will cost, and how you will get it done. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech992">[source] </a> Governor Christie, you and I have talked about this in an
                interview. You say that his big <span class="keyword">wall</span>, his plan to
                deport 11 to 12 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span>, it sounds great, but it's never going to
                happen. Tell him why you're skeptical of his plans? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1000">[source] </a> With all due respect, you said about Donald Trump's plan to
                deport 11 to 12 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span>, "People who say that have no idea what
                this entails." Why not? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1002">[source] </a> ...let's continue the conversation about <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>
                with Dana Bash. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1035">[source] </a> Thank you, Senator Rubio. [applause] Senator Cruz — Senator
                Cruz, this week, we learned more about Dr. Carson's plan for the 11 million to 12
                million <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                    immigrants</span> in this country. Dr. Carson proposed giving these
                    <span class="immigrant">undocumented
                    immigrants</span> a six- month grace period to pay back taxes then to let
                them become guest workers and only to deport people who failed to do that. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1039">[source] </a> OK, from the horse's mouth, Senator Cruz, does that fit your
                definition of <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1045">[source] </a> We'll come back to you — we'll come back to you in one second,
                sir. But Senator Rubio, I'm not sure exactly whose plan he's — he's saying is —
                constitutes <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>, but I know he has said it
                about your plan in the past, so I want to give you a chance to respond, then, Dr.
                Carson, we'll come to you. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1050">[source] </a> Thank you, Senator. Senator — Dr. Carson... [applause] ... I
                want to give you 30 seconds. I'd like you to answer the question. Senator Cruz
                describes plans such as yours as <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>. Why is
                your plan not <span class="keyword">amnesty</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1052">[source] </a> Thank you, Dr. Carson. I want to talk about the issue of
                birthright citizenship, which — which has emerged since the first debate as — as an
                a — a major issue in this campaign. Mr. Trump, you say that babies born in the
                United States to <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> should not any longer get automatic
                American citizenship. Ms. Fiorina says that you are pandering on this issue and
                acting like the politicians that you rail against. What's your message to Ms.
                Fiorina on birthright citizenship? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1457">[source] </a> That's a mouthful, but OK. [laughter] OK, here's the more
                serious question, Ronald Reagan, the 40th President, used the plane behind you to
                accomplish a great many things. Perhaps, most notably, to challenge Mikhail
                Gorbachev to tear down the <span class="keyword">wall</span>, and ultimately, to
                make peace with the USSR. How will the world look different once your Air Force One
                is parked in the hangar of your presidential library? Senator Paul? </p>
      <h2>TODD</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech201">[source] </a> The home stretch of this only Democratic debate in the final week before the primary.

Let me start with you, Secretary Clinton, on this question. Obviously, President Obama got a lot of ambitious stuff done in his first year and a half. You're going to have to make choices. And there's a lot of heavy lifts. And he made choices. He did healthcare and it came at the expense, arguably, of <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span>. Had he put <span class="keyword">immigration reform</span> first, perhaps that gets done and healthcare doesn't.

So there are three big lifts that you've talked about: <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, gun reform, climate change. What do you do first? Because you know the first one is the one you have the best shot at getting done.

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-04.xhtml#speech205">[source] </a> 
         <span class="keyword">Immigration reform</span>, for instance, fell by the wayside in the first term because of this.

</p>
      <h2>TRUMP</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech40">[source] </a>I think the big problem this country has is being politically
            correct. [applause] I've been challenged by so many people, and I don't frankly have
            time for total political correctness. And to be honest with you, this country doesn't
            have time either. This country is in big trouble. We don't win anymore. We lose to
            China. We lose to Mexico both in trade and at the <span class="keyword">border</span>. We lose to everybody. And frankly, what I say, and oftentimes
            it's fun, it's kidding. We have a good time. What I say is what I say. And honestly
            Megyn, if you don't like it, I'm sorry. I've been very nice to you, although I could
            probably maybe not be, based on the way you have treated me. But I wouldn't do that.
            [applause] But you know what, we ...we need strength, we need energy, we need quickness
            and we need brain in this country to turn it around. That, I can tell you right now. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech56">[source] </a> So, if it weren't for me, you wouldn't even be talking about
                <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span>, Chris. You wouldn't even be talking about it. [applause]
            This was not a subject that was on anybody's mind until I brought it up at my
            announcement. And I said, Mexico is sending. Except the reporters, because they're a
            very dishonest lot, generally speaking, in the world of politics, they didn't cover my
            statement the way I said it. <span class="trope">The
                fact is, since then, many killings, murders, crime, drugs pouring across the
                    <span class="keyword">border</span>, are money going out and the drugs
                coming in.</span> And I said we need to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, and it has to be built quickly. And I don't mind having a big beautiful
            door in that <span class="keyword">wall</span> so that people can come into this
            country legally. But we need, Jeb, to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, we
            need to keep <span class="immigrant">illegals</span> out.
            [cheering and applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech58">[source] </a> Border Patrol, I was at the <span class="keyword">border</span> last week. Border Patrol, people that I deal with, that I talk to,
            they say this is what's happening. Because our leaders are stupid. Our politicians are
            stupid. And the Mexican government is much smarter, much sharper, much more cunning.
                <span class="trope">And they send <span class="immigrant">the bad ones</span> over because they
                don't want to pay for them. They don't want to take care of them. Why should they
                when the stupid leaders of the United States will do it for them? And that's what is
                happening whether you like it or not. [cheering and applause] </span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech256">[source] </a> Correct. First of all, I want to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, a <span class="keyword">wall</span> that works. So important,
            and it's a big part of it. Second of all, we have a lot of <span class="immigrant">really bad dudes</span> in this
            country from outside, and I think Chris knows that, maybe as well as anybody. <span class="trope">They go, if I get elected, first day
                they're gone. Gangs all over the place. Chicago, Baltimore, no matter where you
                look.</span>
            <span class="trope">We have a country based on laws. I will make
                sure that those laws are adhered to.</span> These are <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>. <span class="anecdote">I don't think you'd even be asking this question if
                I didn't run because when I ran, and I brought this up, my opening remarks at Trump
                Tower, I took heat like nobody has taken heat in a long time. And, then they found
                out with the killing of Katie, from San Francisco, and so many other crimes, they
                found out that I was right. And, most people, many people, apologized to
                me.</span> I don't think you'd even be talking about <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> if it
            weren't for me. <span class="trope"> So, we have a
                country of laws, they're going to go out, and they'll come back if they deserve to
                come back. If they've had a bad record, if they've been arrested, if they've been in
                jail, they're never coming back. We're going to have a country again. Right now, we
                don't have a country, we don't have a <span class="keyword">border</span>, and
                we're going to do something about it, and it can be done with proper management, and
                it can be done with heart.</span>
        </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech260">[source] </a> ...By the way, I agree with — with what Chris is saying, but, I
            will say this. <span class="immigration">Illegal immigration</span> is costing us more than $200 billion dollars a year
            just to maintain what we have. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech285">[source] </a> ... that they come into our country as an act of love. With all of
            the problems we that we have, in so many instances — we have wonderful people coming in.
            But with all of the problems — this is not an act of love. He's weak on <span class="immigration">immigration</span> — by
            the way, in favor of Common Core, which is also a disaster, but weak on <span class="immigration">immigration</span>. He
            doesn't get my vote. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech294">[source] </a> As I said, we are spending $200 billion — we are spending $200
            billion a year on maintaining what we have. <span class="trope">We will move them out. The <span class="immigrant">great ones</span> will
            come back, the <span class="immigrant">good ones</span> will come back. They'll be expedited, they'll be back, they'll
            come back legally. We'll have a country — they'll come back, legally.</span> 
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech296">[source] </a> Well, I think it's wonderful and all, but I did it a little bit
            half-heartedly, but I do mean it to a large extent. <span class="trope">We have a country, where, to
            assimilate, you have to speak English. And I think that where he was, and the way it
            came out didn't sound right to me. We have to have assimilation — to have a country, we
            have to have assimilation. I'm not the first one to say this, Dana. We've had many
            people over the years, for many, many years, saying the same thing. This is a country
            where we speak English, not Spanish.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech318">[source] </a> Well, first of all, the — the 14th Amendment says very, very
            clearly to a lot of great legal scholars — not television scholars, but legal scholars —
            that it is wrong. It can be corrected with an act of Congress, probably doesn't even
            need that. A woman gets pregnant. She's nine months, she walks across the <span class="keyword">border</span>, she has the baby in the United States, and we take
            care of the baby for 85 years. I don't think so. And by the way, Mexico and almost every
            other country anywhere in the world doesn't have that. We're the only ones dumb enough,
            stupid enough to have it. And people — and by the way, this is not just with respect to
            Mexico. They are coming from Asia to have babies here, and all of a sudden, we have to
            take care of the babies for the life of the baby. The 14th Amendment, it reads properly,
            you can go and — it's probably going to be have to be check — go through a process of
            court, probably ends up at the Supreme Court, but there are a lot of great legal
            scholars that say that is not correct. And in my opinion, it makes absolutely no — we're
            the only — one of the only countries, we're going to take care of those babies for 70,
            75, 80, 90 years? I don't think so. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech991">[source] </a> Correct. First of all, I want to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, a <span class="keyword">wall</span> that works. So important,
                and it's a big part of it. Second of all, we have a lot of really bad dudes in this
                country from outside, and I think Chris knows that, maybe as well as anybody. <span class="trope">They go, if I get elected, first
                    day they're gone. Gangs all over the place. Chicago, Baltimore, no matter where
                    you look.</span>
                <span class="trope">We have a country based on
                    laws. I will make sure that those laws are adhered to.</span> These are
                    <span class="immigrant">illegal
                    immigrants</span>. <span class="anecdote">I don't think you'd even be asking this question if I didn't run because when I
                    ran, and I brought this up, my opening remarks at Trump Tower, I took heat like
                    nobody has taken heat in a long time. And, then they found out with the killing
                    of Katie, from San Francisco, and so many other crimes, they found out that I
                    was right. And, most people, many people, apologized to me.</span> I don't
                think you'd even be talking about illegal immigration if it weren't for me. <span class="trope"> So, we have a country of
                    laws, they're going to go out, and they'll come back if they deserve to come
                    back. If they've had a bad record, if they've been arrested, if they've been in
                    jail, they're never coming back. We're going to have a country again. Right now,
                    we don't have a country, we don't have a <span class="keyword">border</span>, and we're going to do something about it, and it can be done
                    with proper management, and it can be done with heart.</span>
            </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech995">[source] </a> ...By the way, I agree with — with what Chris is saying, but, I
                will say this. <span class="immigration">Illegal
                    immigration</span> is costing us more than $200 billion dollars a year
                just to maintain what we have. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1029">[source] </a> As I said, we are spending $200 billion — we are spending $200
                billion a year on maintaining what we have. <span class="trope">We will move them out. The great ones
                    will come back, the good ones will come back. They'll be expedited, they'll be
                    back, they'll come back legally. We'll have a country — they'll come back,
                    legally.</span>
            </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1031">[source] </a> Well, I think it's wonderful and all, but I did it a little bit
                half-heartedly, but I do mean it to a large extent. <span class="trope">We have a country, where, to assimilate, you
                    have to speak English. And I think that where he was, and the way it came out
                    didn't sound right to me. We have to have assimilation — to have a country, we
                    have to have assimilation. I'm not the first one to say this, Dana. We've had
                    many people over the years, for many, many years, saying the same thing. This is
                    a country where we speak English, not Spanish.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-09-16.xhtml#speech1053">[source] </a> Well, first of all, the — the 14th Amendment says very, very
                clearly to a lot of great legal scholars — not television scholars, but legal
                scholars — that it is wrong. It can be corrected with an act of Congress, probably
                doesn't even need that. A woman gets pregnant. She's nine months, she walks across
                the <span class="keyword">border</span>, she has the baby in the United States,
                and we take care of the baby for 85 years. I don't think so. And by the way, Mexico
                and almost every other country anywhere in the world doesn't have that. We're the
                only ones dumb enough, stupid enough to have it. And people — and by the way, this
                is not just with respect to Mexico. They are coming from Asia to have babies here,
                and all of a sudden, we have to take care of the babies for the life of the baby.
                The 14th Amendment, it reads properly, you can go and — it's probably going to be
                have to be check — go through a process of court, probably ends up at the Supreme
                Court, but there are a lot of great legal scholars that say that is not correct. And
                in my opinion, it makes absolutely no — we're the only — one of the only countries,
                we're going to take care of those babies for 70, 75, 80, 90 years? I don't think so. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech33">[source] </a> No, not a comic book, and it's not a very nicely asked question the
            way you say that. Larry Kudlow is an example, who I have a lot of respect for, who loves
            my tax plan. We're reducing taxes to 15 percent. We're bringing corporate taxes down,
            bringing money back in, corporate inversions. We have $2.5 trillion outside of the
            United States which we want to bring back in. As far as the <span class="keyword">wall</span> is concerned, we're
            going to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>. We're going to create a <span class="keyword">border</span>. We're going to let people in, but
            they're going to come in legally. They're going to come in legally. And it's something
            that can be done, and I get questioned about that. They built the great <span class="keyword">wall</span> of China.
            That's 13,000 miles. Here, we actually need 1,000 because we have natural barriers. So
            we need 1,000. We can do a <span class="keyword">wall</span>. We're going to have a big, fat beautiful door right in
            the middle of the <span class="keyword">wall</span>. We're going to have people come in, but they're coming in
            legally. And Mexico's going to pay for the wall because Mexico — I love the Mexican
            people; I respect the Mexican leaders — but the leaders are much sharper, smarter and
            more cunning than our leaders. And just to finish, people say, how will you get Mexico
            to pay? A politician other than the people in the states — I don't want to — a
            politician cannot get them to pay. I can. We lose, we have a trade imbalance... Excuse
            me, John. ... of $50 billion...</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech244">[source] </a> I was not at all critical of him. I was not at all. In fact,
            frankly, he's complaining about the fact that we're losing some of the most talented
            people. They go to Harvard. They go to Yale. They go to Princeton. They come from
            another country and they're immediately sent out. I am all in favor of keeping these
            <span class="immigrant">talented people</span> here so they can go to work in Silicon Valley.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-10-28.xhtml#speech329">[source] </a> I'm in favor of people coming into this country legally. And you
            know what? They can have it anyway you want. You can call it visas, you can call it work
            permits, you can call it anything you want. <span class="trope">I've created tens of thousands of jobs, and
            in all due respect — and actually some of these folks I really like a lot — but I'm the
            only one that can say that. I have created tens of thousands of jobs, and I'll be
            creating many millions of jobs if I'm given — if I'm given the opportunity to be
            president. As far as Mark is concerned, as far as the visas are concerned, if we need
            people, they have — it's fine. They have to come into this country legally.</span> We have a
            country of <span class="keyword">borders</span>. We have a country of laws. We have to obey the laws. It's fine if
            they come in, but they have to come in legally.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-12-15.xhtml#speech290">[source] </a> I have a very hardline position, <span class="trope">we have a country or we don't have a
        country</span>. People that have come into our country illegally, they have to go. They have to
        come back into through a legal process.<span class="trope"> want a strong border. I do want a <span class="keyword">wall</span>. <span class="keyword">Walls</span> do
        work, you just have to speak to the folks in Israel. <span class="keyword">Walls</span> work if they're properly
        constructed. I know how to build, believe me, I know how to build.</span> 
         <span class="trope">I feel a very, very
        strong bind, and really I'm bound to this country, we either have a <span class="keyword">border</span> or we don't.</span>
        People can come into the country, we welcome people to come but they have to come in
        legally.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech57">[source] </a>Okay. First of all, Nikki this afternoon said I'm a friend of hers.
            Actually a close friend. And wherever you are sitting Nikki, I'm a friend. We're
            friends. That's good. [laughter] But she did say there was anger. And I could say, oh,
            I'm not angry. I'm very angry because our country is being run horribly and I will
            gladly accept the mantle of anger. Our military is a disaster. [applause] Our healthcare
            is a horror show. Obamacare, we're going to repeal it and replace it.<span class="trope"> We have no borders.</span> Our vets are
            being treated horribly. <span class="immigration">Illegal
                immigration</span> is beyond belief. Our country is being run by incompetent
            people. And yes, I am angry. [applause] And I won't be angry when we fix it, but until
            we fix it, I'm very, very angry. And I say that to Nikki. So when Nikki said that, I
            wasn't offended. She said the truth. One of your colleagues interviewed me. And said,
            well, she said you were angry and I said to myself, huh, she's right. I'm not fighting
            that. I didn't find it offensive at all. I'm angry because our country is a mess.
            [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech116">[source] </a>No. [laughter] No. [applause] Look, we have to stop with political
            correctness. <span class="trope">We have to get
                down to creating a country that's not going to have the kind of problems that we've
                had with people flying planes into the World Trade Centers, with the — with the
                shootings in California, with all the problems all over the world.</span> I just
            left Indonesia — bomb, bomb, bomb, bomb. We have to find out what's going on. I said
            temporarily. I didn't say permanently. I said temporarily. And I have many great Muslim
            friends. And some of them, I will say, not all, have called me and said, "Donald, thank
            you very much; you're exposing an unbelievable problem and we have to get to the bottom
            of it." And unlike President Obama, where he refuses even to use the term of what's
            going on, he can't use the term for whatever reason. And if you can't use the term,
            you're never going to solve the problem. My Muslim friends, some, said, "thank you very
            much; we'll get to the bottom of it." But we have a serious problem. And we can't be the
            stupid country any more. We're laughed at all over the world. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-01-14.xhtml#speech124">[source] </a>
         <span class="trope">I want security
                for this country. OK? [applause] I want security. I'm tired of seeing what's going
                on, between the border where the people flow over; people come in; they live; they
                shoot. I want security for this country.</span>
            <span class="trope">We have a serious problem with,
                as you know, with radical Islam. We have a tremendous problem. It's not only a
                problem here. It's a problem all over the world. I want to find out why those two
                young people — those two horrible young people in California when they shot the 14
                people, killed them — people they knew, people that held the wedding reception for
                them. I want to find out — many people saw pipe bombs and all sorts of things all
                over their apartment.</span> Why weren't they vigilant? Why didn't they call? Why
            didn't they call the police? And by the way, the police are the most mistreated people
            in this country. I will tell you that. [applause] The most mistreated people. In fact,
            we need to — wait a minute — we need vigilance. We have to find out — many people knew
            about what was going on. Why didn't they turn those two people in so that you wouldn't
            have had all the death? There's something going on and it's bad. And I'm saying we have
            to get to the bottom of it. That's all I'm saying. We need security.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech17">[source] </a>I actually think I have the best temperament. I built a massive
                corporation. I employ thousands and thousands of people. I've gotten along with
                people for years and years, have tremendous relationships with many people,
                including politicians on both sides. And no matter how you cut it, when I — when I
                came out, I hit <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, I hit it very hard. Everybody said, "Oh, the
                temperament," because I talked about <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>. Now, everybody's coming to
                me, they're all trying to say, well, he's right, we have to come to him. I hit other
                things. I talked about Muslims. We have a problem. Nobody else wanted to mention the
                problem, I brought it up. I took a lot of heat. We have to have a temporary
                something, because there's something going on that's not good. And remember this,
                I'm the only one up here, when the war of Iraq — in Iraq, I was the one that said,
                "Don't go, don't do it, you're going to destabilize the Middle East." So, I'm not
                one with a trigger. I'm not one with a trigger. Other people up here, believe me,
                would be a lot faster. But I'll build the mill arbitrary stronger, bigger, better
                than anybody up here, and nobody is going to mess with us. That, I can tell you.
                [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-06.xhtml#speech364">[source] </a>That's because he got Ben Carson's votes, by the way, but we
                won't [inaudible]. Our country that we love so much doesn't win anymore. We don't
                win with the military, we don't' win on the <span class="keyword">border</span>. You look at New Hampshire with
                the tremendous problem we have with heroin. Number one thing I hear from the people
                of New Hampshire, who I love, and developed such relationships, we don't win with
                healthcare. We don't win with trade. You look at what other countries are doing to
                us. China. Everyone, they're killing us on trade. If I'm elected president, we will
                win, and we will win, and we will win. Thank you, thank you very much.
                [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech160">[source] </a>I want everybody taken care of, but we have to take care of our
            people in this country. We're not taking care of our people. We have no <span class="keyword">border</span>. We have no control. <span class="immigrant">People</span> are flooding across. We can't have it. We either
            have a <span class="keyword">border</span>, and I'm very strongly — I'm not
            proposing. <span class="platform">I will build a
                    <span class="keyword">wall</span>. I will build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>. Remember this, the <span class="keyword">wall</span> will be
                paid for by Mexico.</span> We are not being treated right. [applause] We are not
            being treated properly. <span class="trope">If we
                don't have <span class="keyword">borders</span>, if we don't have strength, we
                don't have a country.</span>
            <span class="immigrant">People</span> are flowing across. <span class="trope">We have to take care of our
                people. Believe me.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech190">[source] </a>Look...[applause]...When I announced that I was running for
            president on June 16th, <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> wasn't even a subject. If I didn't bring it up, we
            wouldn't even be talking. Now, I don't often agree with Marco, and I don't often agree
            with Ted, but I can in this case. <span class="trope">The weakest person on this stage by far on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span> is Jeb Bush. They
                come out of an act of love, whether you like it or not. He is so weak on
                    <span class="immigration">illegal
                    immigration</span> it's laughable, and everybody knows
            it.</span>
      </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech217">[source] </a>I would build consensus with Congress, and Congress would agree
                with me. I'll give you an example, because I don't like the idea of using executive
                orders like our president. It is a disaster what he's doing. I would build
                consensus, but consensus means you have to work hard. You have to cajole. You have
                to get them into the Oval Office and get them all together, and you have to make
                deals. Let me just tell you, I mentioned before, China — big Chinese company bought
                the Chicago Exchange. Kerry is moving — and if you saw the people, because they have
                a video of the announcement that Carrier is moving to Mexico, O.K.? Well, I'll tell
                you what. I would go right now to Carrier and I would say I am going to work awfully
                hard. You're going to make air conditioners now in Mexico. You're going to get all
                of these 1,400 people that are being laid off — they're laid off. They were crying.
                They were — it was a very sad situation. You're going to go to Mexico. You're going
                to make air conditioners in Mexico, you're going to put them across our <span class="keyword">border</span> with no tax. I'm going to tell them right now, I
                am going to get consensus from Congress and we're going to tax you when those air
                conditioners come. So stay where you are or build in the United States, because we
                are killing ourselves with trade pacts that are no good for us and no good for our
                workers. [applause]</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2016-02-13.xhtml#speech356">[source] </a>Thank you. Politicians are all talk, no action. You've seen
                where they've take you to. We are 19 trillion dollars right now. It's going to be
                increased with that horrible budget from a month ago that was just approved by
                politicians. We need a change. We need a very big change. We're going to make our
                country great again. I say this every night, every day, every afternoon, and it's so
                true — we don't win anymore. We don't win with health care, we don't win with ISIS
                and the military, we don't take care of our vets, we don't care of our <span class="keyword">borders</span>, we don't win. We are going to start winning
                again. We are not going to be controlled by people that are special interests and
                lobbyists that everybody here has contributed to. And you know what, they do exactly
                what those folks want them to do. We are going to make our country great, and we're
                going to do the right thing. I'm working for you. I'm not working for anybody else.
                Thank you very much.</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech40">[source] </a> I think the big problem this country has is being politically correct. [applause]

I've been challenged by so many people, and I don't frankly have time for total political correctness. And to be honest with you, this country doesn't have time either. This country is in big trouble. We don't win anymore. We lose to China. We lose to Mexico both in trade and at the <span class="keyword">border</span>. We lose to everybody.

And frankly, what I say, and oftentimes it's fun, it's kidding. We have a good time. What I say is what I say. And honestly Megyn, if you don't like it, I'm sorry. I've been very nice to you, although I could probably maybe not be, based on the way you have treated me. But I wouldn't do that. [applause]

But you know what, we ...we need strength, we need energy, we need quickness and we need brain in this country to turn it around. That, I can tell you right now.

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech56">[source] </a> So, if it weren't for me, you wouldn't even be talking about
                <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span>, Chris. You wouldn't even be talking about it. [applause]
            This was not a subject that was on anybody's mind until I brought it up at my
            announcement. And I said, Mexico is sending. Except the reporters, because they're a
            very dishonest lot, generally speaking, in the world of politics, they didn't cover my
            statement the way I said it. <span class="trope">The
                fact is, since then, many killings ,murders, crime, drugs pouring across the <span class="keyword">border</span>,
                are money going out and the drugs coming in.</span> And I said we need to build a
                <span class="keyword">wall</span>, and it has to be built quickly. And I don't
            mind having a big beautiful door in that <span class="keyword">wall</span> so that people can come into this country
            legally. But we need, Jeb, to build a <span class="keyword">wall</span>, we need to keep <span class="immigrant">illegals</span> out. [cheering and applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech58">[source] </a> Border Patrol, I was at the <span class="keyword">border</span> last week. Border Patrol, people
            that I deal with, that I talk to, they say this is what's happening. Because our leaders
            are stupid. Our politicians are stupid. And the Mexican government is much smarter, much
            sharper, much more cunning. <span class="trope">And
                they send <span class="immigrant">the bad ones</span>
                over because they don't want to pay for them. They don't want to take care of them.
                Why should they when the stupid leaders of the United States will do it for them?
                And that's what is happening whether you like it or not. [cheering and applause]
            </span>
        </p>
      <h2>TUMULTY</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech32">[source] </a> Secretary Clinton, my question was about his character. And
                that is one of the primary things that Americans think about when they choose their
                next president. How would you describe the character of a person who has said the
                sorts of things he has about <span class="immigrant">Mexican immigrants</span>, about women, and who would ban people from
                entering this country based on their religion? </p>
      <h2>UNKNOWN</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-03-09.xhtml#speech169">[source] </a>[through translator: And we continue now, connected with
                Univision for you to send us [inaudible] first Democratic debate focusing in
                Hispanic topics. I have [inaudible] that supported [inaudible]. Good evening, good
                evening. We heard a lot about <span class="immigration">immigration</span>, about the deportations and race. In your opinion,
                who [inaudible] better and who presented the <span class="keyword">immigration proposal</span>? </p>
      <h2>WALKER</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech70">[source] </a> Chris, I actually said that on your show earlier this year.
            [crosstalk] I acknowledged that. I said I actually listened to the American people. And
            I think people across America want a leader who's actually going to listen to them. I
            talked to border state governors and other elected officials. I look at how this
            president, particularly through last November, messed up the <span class="immigration">immigration system</span> in this
            country. Most importantly, I listened to the people of America. <span class="platform">I believe we need to secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>. I've been to the <span class="keyword">border</span> with Governor Abbott in Texas and others, seeing the problems
                that they have there. There is international criminal organizations penetrating our
                southern based <span class="keyword">borders</span>, and we need to do something about it.</span> Secure the
            <span class="keyword">border</span>, <span class="platform">enforce the law</span>, <span class="keyword">no
                amnesty</span>, and <span class="platform">go
                    forward with the <span class="immigration">legal immigration system</span> that gives priority to American working
                families and wages.</span> [applause] </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech70">[source] </a> Chris, I actually said that on your show earlier this year.
            [crosstalk] I acknowledged that. I said I actually listened to the American people. And
            I think people across America want a leader who's actually going to listen to them. I
            talked to border state governors and other elected officials. I look at how this
            president, particularly through last November, messed up the immigration system in this
            country. Most importantly, I listened to the people of America. <span class="platform">I believe we need to secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>. I've been to
                the <span class="keyword">border</span> with Governor Abbott in Texas and others, seeing the problems that they
                have there. There is international criminal organizations penetrating our southern
                based borders, and we need to do something about it.</span> Secure the <span class="keyword">border</span>,
            enforce the law, <span class="keyword">no amnesty</span>, and <span class="platform">go forward with the legal immigration system that
                gives priority to American working families and wages.</span> [applause] </p>
      <h2>WALLACE</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech53">[source] </a> Gentlemen, we're turning to a new subject that all of you have
            been talking about and some of you have been disagreeing about, and that is the issue of <span class="immigration">
                immigration</span>. Governor Bush, you released a new plan this week on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>
            focusing on enforcement, which some suggest is your effort to show that you're not soft
            on that issue. I want to ask you about a statement that you made last year about
                <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>.
            And here's what you said.They broke the law, but it's not a felony, it's an act of love.
            It's an act of commitment to your family." Do you stand by that statement and do you
            stand by your support for earned legal status? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech55">[source] </a> Thank you, sir. [applause] Mr. Trump, it has not escaped
            anybody's notice that you say that the Mexican government, the Mexican government is
            sending criminals ...rapists, drug dealers, across the <span class="keyword">border</span>. Governor Bush has called those remarks, quote, "extraordinarily
            ugly." I'd like you ...you're right next to him ...tell us ...talk to him directly and
            say how you respond to that and ...and you have repeatedly said that you have evidence
            that the Mexican government is doing this, but you have evidence you have refused or
            declined to share. Why not use this first Republican presidential debate to share your
            proof with the American people? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech57">[source] </a> Mr. Trump, I'll give you 30 seconds ...I'll give you 30 seconds
            to answer my question, which was, what evidence do you have, specific evidence that the
            Mexican government is sending criminals across the <span class="keyword">border</span>? Thirty seconds. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech59">[source] </a> All right. Obviously there's a lot more to talk about this. We're
            going to have more questions for the candidates on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>, plus other key topics
            including your questions on Facebook.[video clip begins] UNIDENTIFIED </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech63">[source] </a> Welcome back to FOX News/Facebook Republican Debate Night. We're
            going to continue the questions now on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>. We kind of ended with
            a cliffhanger there. So let's continue the conversation. Governor Kasich, I know you
            don't like to talk about Donald Trump. But I do want to ask you about the merit of what
            he just said. When you say that the American government is stupid, that the Mexican
            government is sending criminals, that we're being bamboozled, is that an adequate
            response to the question of <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech65">[source] </a> Respectfully, can we talk about<span class="immigration"> illegal immigration</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech67">[source] </a> All right, well, Senator Rubio, let me see if I can do better
            with you. Is it as simple as our leaders are stupid, their leaders are smart, and all of
            these <span class="immigrant">illegals</span> coming over are
            criminals? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech69">[source] </a> Governor Walker. [applause] Governor Walker, from 2002 until as
            recently as 2013, just two years ago, you supported <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>, including a <span class="keyword">path
                to citizenship</span>. Now you say that was a quick reaction to something you
            hadn't really thought about, and that you've changed your mind. Other than politics,
            could you explain why in the last two years you've changed your position on a <span class="keyword">path
            to citizenship</span>, and are there other past positions that we shouldn't hold you to? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_repub_2015-08-06.xhtml#speech71">[source] </a> Senator Cruz, some 1,400 people submitted questions on this very
            hot topic of <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> on Facebook, and a number of them were about the murder of
            Kate Steinle in San Francisco, allegedly shot down by an <span class="immigrant">illegal</span>. Doug Bettencourt sent
            this question, "will you support Kate Steinle's Law," which would impose a mandatory
            five-year prison term for an <span class="immigrant">illegal</span> who is deported and then returns to this country?
            "And will you defund <span class="keyword">sanctuary cities</span> for
            violating federal law?" </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech53">[source] </a> Gentlemen, we're turning to a new subject that all of you have
            been talking about and some of you have been disagreeing about, and that is the issue of
            immigration. Governor Bush, you released a new plan this week on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>
            focusing on enforcement, which some suggest is your effort to show that you're not soft
            on that issue. I want to ask you about a statement that you made last year about
                <span class="immigrant">illegal immigrants</span>.
            And here's what you said.They
                broke the law, but it's not a felony, it's an act of love. It's an act of commitment
                to your family." Do you stand by that statement and do you stand by your
            support for earned legal status? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech55">[source] </a> Thank you, sir. [applause] Mr. Trump, it has not escaped
            anybody's notice that you say that the Mexican government, the Mexican government is
            sending criminals ...rapists, drug dealers, across the <span class="keyword">border</span>. Governor Bush has called
            those remarks, quote, "extraordinarily ugly." I'd like you ...you're right next to him
            ...tell us ...talk to him directly and say how you respond to that and ...and you have
            repeatedly said that you have evidence that the Mexican government is doing this, but
            you have evidence you have refused or declined to share. Why not use this first
            Republican presidential debate to share your proof with the American people? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech57">[source] </a> Mr. Trump, I'll give you 30 seconds ...I'll give you 30 seconds
            to answer my question, which was, what evidence do you have, specific evidence that the
            Mexican government is sending criminals across the <span class="keyword">border</span>? Thirty seconds. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech59">[source] </a> All right. Obviously there's a lot more to talk about this. We're
            going to have more questions for the candidates on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>, plus other key topics
            including your questions on Facebook. [video clip begins] UNIDENTIFIED </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech63">[source] </a> Welcome back to FOX News/Facebook Republican Debate Night. We're
            going to continue the questions now on <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>. We kind of ended with
            a cliffhanger there. So let's continue the conversation. Governor Kasich, I know you
            don't like to talk about Donald Trump. But I do want to ask you about the merit of what
            he just said. When you say that the American government is stupid, that the Mexican
            government is sending criminals, that we're being bamboozled, is that an adequate
            response to the question of <span class="immigration">illegal immigration</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech65">[source] </a> Respectfully, can we talk about<span class="immigration"> illegal immigration</span>? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech67">[source] </a> All right, well, Senator Rubio, let me see if I can do better
            with you. Is it as simple as our leaders are stupid, their leaders are smart, and all of
            these <span class="immigrant">illegals</span> coming over are
            criminals? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech69">[source] </a> Governor Walker. [applause] Governor Walker, from 2002 until as
            recently as 2013, just two years ago, you supported <span class="keyword">comprehensive immigration reform</span>, including a <span class="keyword">path
                to citizenship</span>. Now you say that was a quick reaction to something you
            hadn't really thought about, and that you've changed your mind. Other than politics,
            could you explain why in the last two years you've changed your position on a path to
            citizenship, and are there other past positions that we shouldn't hold you to? </p>
      <p>
         <a href="montgomery_rep1.xhtml#speech71">[source] </a> Senator Cruz, some 1,400 people submitted questions on this very
            hot topic of <span class="immigration">illegal
                immigration</span> on Facebook, and a number of them were about the murder of
            Kate Steinle in San Francisco, allegedly shot down by an illegal. Doug Bettencourt sent
            this question, "will you support Kate Steinle's Law," which would impose a mandatory
            five-year prison term for an illegal who is deported and then returns to this country?
            "And will you defund <span class="keyword">sanctuary cities</span> for violating federal law?" </p>
      <h2>WEBB</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech3">[source] </a> Thank you.

You know, people are disgusted with the way that money has corrupted our political process, intimidating incumbents and empowering Wall Street every day, the turnstile government that we see, and also the power of the financial sector in both parties.

They're looking for a leader who understands how the system works, who has not been coopted by it, and also has a proven record of accomplishing different things. I have a record of working across the political aisle. I've also spent more than half of my professional life away from politics in the independent world of being an author, a journalist, and a sole proprietor.

In government service, I've fought and bled for our country in Vietnam as a Marine. I spent years as Assistant Secretary of Defense, Secretary of the Navy — in the Reagan administration.

In the senate, I spoke about economic fairness and social justice from day one. I also wrote and passed the best piece of veterans education legislation in history, the Post 9/11 G.I. Bill. I brought criminal justice reform out of the political shadows and into the national discussion. I led what later became called the Strategic Pivot to Asia two years before President Obama was elected.

I know where my loyalties are.

My mother grew up in the poverty of east Arkansas chopping cotton, picking strawberries. Three of her seven siblings died in childhood. <span class="anecdote">My wife, Hong, came to this country as a <span class="immigrant">refugee</span> from war torn Vietnam — learned English, a language that was not spoken at home, and earned her way into Cornell Law School.</span> I have five daughters. Amy works with disabled veterans, Sarah is an emergency room nurse, Julia is a massage therapist, Emily and Georgia are still in school. My son Jim fought as an infantry Marine on the bloody streets of Ramadi.

You may be sure that in a Webb administration, the highest priority will be the working people who every day go out and make this country stronger at home, and who give us the right reputation and security overseas under a common sense foreign policy. [cheering and applause]

</p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech299">[source] </a> I wouldn't have a problem with that. <span class="anecdote"> Let me start by saying my wife is an <span class="immigrant">immigrant</span>. She was a <span class="immigrant">refugee</span>, her
                family escaped from Vietnam on a boat-- her entire extended family, after the
                communists took over, when hundreds of thousands of people were out there and
                thousands of them were dying. Went to two refugee camps, she never spoke English in
                her home, and she ended, as I said, graduating from Cornell Law School. That's not
                only American dream, that's a value that we have with a good <span class="keyword">immigration system</span> in place. </span> No
            country has — is a country without defining its borders. We need to resolve this issue.
            I actually introduced an amendment in the 2007 <span class="keyword">immigration bill</span>. </p>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2015-10-13.xhtml#speech301">[source] </a>  Giving a <span class="keyword">pathway to citizenship</span> to those
            people who had come here, and put down their roots, and met as a series of standards. .. </p>
      <h2>WOODRUFF</h2>
      <p>
         <a href="debate_dem_2016-02-11.xhtml#speech59">[source] </a> Thank you. Senator Sanders, one of the causes of anxiety for working
            class Americans is connected to <span class="immigrant">immigrants</span>. President Obama, as you know, has issued
            executive actions to permit some 5 million <span class="immigrant">undocumented immigrants</span> who are living now in
            the United States to come out of the shadows without fear of <span class="keyword">deportation</span> to get work
            permits. Would you go further than that? And if so, how specifically would you do it?
            Should an undocumented family watching this debate tonight, say, in Nevada, rest easy,
            not fear of further <span class="keyword">deportations</span> under a Sanders presidency? </p>
   </body>
</html>
